REVIEW Cell Research ( 2000 ) , 10 , 245-266 Inducible resistance to Fas-mediated apoptosis in B cells RotHstEm THomas L Departments of Medicine and Microbiology , and the Evans Memorial Department of Clinical Research , Boston University Medical Center , Boston , MA , USA ABSTRACT Apoptosis produced in B cells through Fas ( APO-1 , CD95 ) triggering is regulated by signals derived from other surface receptors : CD40 engagement produces upregulation of Fas expression and marked susceptibility to Fas-induced cell death , whereas antigen receptor engagement , or IL-4R engagement , inhibits Fas killing and in so doing induces a state of Fas-resistance , even in otherwise sensitive , CD40-stimulated targets .
Surface immunoglobulin and IL-4R utilize at least partially distinct pathways to produce Fas-resistance that differentially depend on PKC and STAT6 , respectively .
Further , surface immunoglobulin signaling for inducible Fas-resistance bypasses Btk , requires NF- « B , and entails new macromolecular synthesis .
Terminal effectors of B cell Fasg-resistance include the known anti-apoptotic gene products , Bel-xL and FLIP , and a novel anti-apoptotic gene that encodes FAIM ( Fas Apoptosis Inhibitory Molecule ) .
faim was identified by differential display and exists in two alter Abbreviations : AICD , activation-induced cell death ; ALPS , autoimmune lymphoproliferation syndrome ; CARD , caspase recruitment domain ; CK , casein kinase ; CMC , cell-mediated cytotoxicity ; DISC , death-inducing signaling complex ; EST , expressed sequence tag ; FADD , Fas-associating protein with death domain ; FAIM , Fas apoptosis inhibitory molecule ; FISH , fluorescence in situ hybridization ; FLICE , FADD-like ICE ; FLIP , FLICE inhibitory protein ; HEL , hen egg lysozyme ; ICE , interleukin-1 $ -converting enzyme ; IFN , interferon ; KO , knock-out ; LPS , lipopolysaccharide ; PARP , poly-ADP ribose polymerase ; PCR , polymerase chain reaction ; PH , pleckstrin homology ; PKC , protein kinase C ; PMA , phorbol myristate acetate ; RT , reverse transcription ; TNFR , tumor necrosis factor receptor # Correspondence to : Thomas L. Rothstein , Immunobiology Unit , Department of Medicine , EBRC-437 , Boston Medical Center , 650 Albany Street , Boston , MA 02118 USA Fax : 617-638-7140 , E-mail : trothstein @ med-med1.bu.edu Inducible Fas-resistance in B cells natively spliced forms ; faim-S is broadly expressed , but faim-L expression is tissue-specific .
The FAIM sequence is highly evo-lutionarily conserved , suggesting an important role for this molecule throughout phylogeny .
Inducible resistance to Fas killing is hypothesized to protect foreign antigen-specific B cells during potentially hazardous interactions with FasL-bearing T cells , whereas autoreactive B cells fail to become Fas-resistant and are deleted via Fas-dependent cytotoxicity .
Inadvertent or aberrant acquisition of Fas-resistance may permit autoreactive B cells to escape Fas deletion , and malignant lymphocytes to impede anti-tumor immunity .
key words : Apoptosis , Fas , B lymphocytes , FAIM , FLIP , Bel-xi , surface immunoglobulin , IL-4R , CD40 , autoreactivity .
INRODUCTION Fas/APO-1 ( CD95 ) is a death receptor of the TNF receptor ( TNFR ) family , and shares with death receptors TNFR1 , DR3 ( TRAMP , Wsl , APO-3 ) , DR4 ( TRAIL-R1 ) and DR5 ( TRAIL-R2 ) extracellular cysteine-rich pseudorepeats , intracellular C-terminal death domains , and reliance on FADD as a critical early mediator of signaling for cell death ( although FADD-dependence has been questioned for DR4 ) [ 1-7 ] .
The cognate ligand for Fas ( FasL ) is an activation antigen expressed by CD4+ Th1 effector cells and CD8 cytotoxic T lymphocytes , ( although its activity in the latter is frequently masked by the more substantial destructive power of the perforin-granzyme system ) , as well as natural killer cells [ 8-13 ] .
The congenital loss of Fas ( as in lpr/lpr mice and Fas null mice , and in human Autoimmune Lymphoproliferation Syndrome ) or of its ligand ( as in gld/gld mice ) is accompanied by severely elevated levels of serum autoantibodies associated with frank autoimmunity [ 14-24 ] ; for this reason Fas is thought to play a key role in the regulation of B cells , particularly in the regulation of autoreactive B cells .
These observations are supported and refined by additional experiments , carried out over the last dozen years , that more clearly document abnormal B cell function in Fas-deficient animals and distinguish B cell defects from abnormalities in the T cell population .
Thus , in both mixed radiation chimeras and tetraparental chimeras , autoimmune immunoglobulin was derived solely from lpr B cells and not from co-existing phenotypically normal B cells that were simultaneously exposed to abnormal lpr T cells [ 25-27 ] .
Moreover , autoantibody production was present and undiminished when Fas deficiency was restricted to B cells through production of transgenic MRL - lpr mice 246 Rothstein TL that express Fas within the thymocyte and peripheral T cell populations by use of the murine Ick promoter , in comparison to unmanipulated MRL mice [ 28 ] .
These results indicate that a block in the Fas death pathway leads to dysregulation of B cells that express self-recognizing specificities , suggesting that under normal circumstance Fas functions to delete such autoreactive B cells .
In lpr and Fas null B cells , Fas-induced cell death is blocked congenitally by loss of surface Fas expression .
However , this is a somewhat artificial , certainly non-physiological , way of thwarting Fas killing .
In view of the very severe immune dyscrasias attendant to genetic interference with Fas signaling for cell death , the question arose as to whether Fas-mediated cell death is ever blocked during normal immune cell activity , because if that would happen , it might contribute to autoimmune B cell activity .
More generally , it was unclear to what extent the outcome of Fas signaling is modulated by other influences , particularly receptor-specific ones .
Although it was known that B cell activation , as with lipopolysaccharide , was associated with Fas expression and sensitivity to Fas signaling for cell death that greatly exceed the low levels present in naive B cells [ 29-33 ] , we pursued this issue further , by evaluating the effect of triggering certain surface receptors in primary B cells .
Early on it was found that B cell stimulation through CD40 for 1-3 d markedly upregulated both surface Fas expression , and sensitivity to Fas-mediated apoptosis .
In direct contrast , B cell stimulation through surface immunoglobulin ( slg ) failed to enhance susceptibility to Fas killing at all .
Thus , these two mitogenic receptor- mediated signals differ markedly in their capacity to increase the sensitivity of B cell targets to Fas-mediated apoptosis [ 34 ] .
We then evaluated whether the failure of slg engagement to induce Fas-sensitivity resulted from a passive process , due to inadequate signaling for this outcome , or a dominant process , due to active suppression of cytotoxicity .
To address this issue , primary B cells were stimulated with CD4O0L in combination with , or sequentially with , anti-Ig , and then examined for susceptibility to apoptosis in the form of FasL-depen-dent Th1-cell mediated cytotoxicity ( Th1-CMC ) .
B cells stimulated by CD4OL plus anti-Ig expressed increased levels of surface Fas comparable in magnitude to the elevated levels present in B cells stimulated by CD40L alone ; however , the susceptibility of dual-stimulated B cells to Fas-mediated apoptosis was much reduced in comparison to B cells stimulated only by CD40L [ 34 ] , [ 35 ] .
Whereas the percent specific lysis produced during a 4 h `` Cr release assay of B cells stimulated by CD4O0L alone typically ranged from 40-60 % at the highest Th1 effector : B cell target ratio tested ( 9:1 ) , the corresponding percent specific lysis for B cells stimulated by both CD4OL and anti-Ig was only 0-15 % .
Considering a large number of experiments , the mean level of protection against Fas killing produced by slg signaling amounted to more than 20-fold , meaning that a greater than 20-fold higher Th1 effector : B cell target ratio was needed to produce comparable levels of apoptosis in B cells stimulated by the combination of CD4O0L plus anti-Ig as in B cells stimulated by CD4O0L alone [ 35 ] .
Thus , anti-Ig-induced sIg crosslinking established a state of resistance to Fas-mediated apoptosis , or Fas-resistance .
Moreover , slg 247 Inducible Fas-resistance in B cells engagement by specific antigen similarly produced Fas-resistance , in experiments in which B cells were obtained from transgenic animals expressing either B cell receptors that recognize H-2K** , or B cell receptors that recognize HEL , demonstrating that sIg-induced Fas-resistance is a physiologic process and is not dependent on the use of crosslinking anti-Ig antibody [ 34 ] , [ 86 ] .
The opposing effects of CD40 and slg engagement on Fas signaling for cell death raised the question of whether engagement of other surface receptors might similarly alter susceptibility to Fas-mediated apoptosis .
To address this issue , various ligands were tested in conjunction with CD4O0L stimulation prior to evaluating sensitivity to Th1 cell-mediated cytotoxicity .
Through this effort IL-4 , alone among the cytokines examined , was found to produce Fas-resistance [ 37 ] .
As with anti-Ig , IL-4 produced Fas-resistance when added either concurrently , or sequentially , with CD4O0L , and did so without any change in the elevated level of Fas expression produced by CD40 signaling ; however , IL-4 in optimal doses was less effective than anti-Ig , providing a level of protection against Fas-mediated apoptosis that averaged about 10-fold [ 37 ] .
These results with anti-Ig and IL-4 indicate that in normal B cells , Fas-mediated apoptosis can be suppressed through inducible receptor-triggered mechanisms completely distinct from genetic alteration of Fas .
This paradigm is supported by subsequent reports of in vitro experiments in the human system , and of in vivo experiments in the murine system [ 38-41 ] .
Thus , the outcome of B cell stimulation with respect to Fas signaling is regulated on the basis of particular environmental cues as interpreted by specific receptor binding .
In the experiments described above , Fas-mediated apoptosis was initiated by Th1 cell membrane-bound FasL , and Fas-resistance was observed in B cells stimulated by CD40L plus anti-Ig , or by CD4O0L plus IL-4 .
Similar results were obtained with recombinant , soluble FasL [ 35 ] .
Surprisingly though , a different outcome appeared when Fas killing was triggered by soluble Jo-2 monoclonal anti-Fas antibody , in which case the level of protection against Fas-mediated apoptosis was much reduced in comparison to that which was apparent with Th1 effector cells , to the point that Fas-resistance was not always evident .
The failure to observe Fas-resistance in antibody-treated B cells suggests that Jo-2 produces a super-physiological stimulus that overwhelms receptor-driven Fas-resistance .
The reason for this might be that B cell FcR crosslinking of whole anti-Fas antibody produces more efficient Fas engagement , inasmuch as Jo-2-induced Fas killing was blocked by 2.4G2 anti-FcR antibody , or it might be that the anti-Fas antibody binds an epitope distinct from that engaged by FasL , inasmuch as soluble FasL did not block the ability of Jo-2 to produce apoptosis in Fas-resistant B cells treated with CD4O0L plus anti-Ig [ 35 ] ( and unpublished results ) .
Regardless of the mechanism , however , the results with Jo-2 indicate that sIg- and IL-4R-induced protection against Fas-mediated apoptosis is relative rather than absolute , and can be overcome by especially strong apoptotic signals derived from Fas , including those produced by particularly high Th1 effector cell : B cell target cell ratios .
248 Rothstein TL Receptor signaling for Fas-resistance Although the outcomes of engaging sIg and IL-4R in terms of inducible resistance to Fas-mediated apoptosis are similar , the pathways utilized to bring this about differ , as evidenced by the reliance of Fas-resistance induction on specific signaling mediators .
Thus , inhibition of PKC by cell-permeant H7 , or depletion of PKC by prolonged exposure to PMA , blocked induction of Fas-resistance by anti-Ig but had no effect on IL-4R-induced Fas-resistance [ 35 ] .
Conversely , the loss of STATS ( in B cells obtained from STAT6-deficient mice ) blocked induction of Fasg-resistance by IL-4 but had no effect on slg-induced Fas-resistance [ 42 ] .
( Of interest , sIg engagement was recently shown to trigger STATE activation [ 43 ] , which raised the possibility that STAT6 might form the basis of a common pathway leading both from slg and from IL-4R to inducible Fas-resistance ; however , the results discussed above negate this possibility ) .
Further , the relative speed with which Fas-resistance was established also differed for anti-Ig and IL-4 .
Whereas anti-Ig acted rapidly to produce Fas-resistance that was apparent at 3 h , and maximal after 12 h , IL-4-induced Fas-resistance developed much more slowly and only reached a maximum after 24 h of exposure [ 35 ] , [ 87 ] .
These results taken together indicate that sIg and IL-4 receptors utilize at least partially non-overlapping intracellular signaling pathways to bring about Fas-resistance .
The timecourse experiments were carried out by stimulating B cells with CD4O0L for a total of 48 h , and adding anti-Ig or IL-4 at various times before the end of the culture period .
Because B cell treatment with CD40L for 24 h was sufficient to induce Fas-sensitivity , the capacity of anti-Ig and IL-4 to produce maximal Fas-resistance when added 24 h before the end of 48 h culture periods with CD40L means that these reagents do not simply prevent the development of Fas-sensitivity in response to CD40 engagement but actually reverse susceptibility to Fas-mediated apoptosis that has already been established .
Additional work on metabolic pathways has focused on sIg-induced Fas-resistance .
In view of the PKC requirement for Fasg-resistance produced by anti-Ig , the capacity of PKC-activating phorbol ester treatment to induce Fas-resistance was examined .
Phorbol ester produced only partial protection against Fas-mediated apoptosis , whereas the combination of a phorbol ester plus a calcium ionophore brought about virtually complete Fas-resistance , the level of which was as high or higher than that associated with anti-Ig [ 35 ] .
This recapitulates results with cell cycle progression as an endpoint , for which only the combination of a phorbol ester and a calcium ionophore , which together mimic the effects of slg-triggered PLC-mediated second messengers , produces S phase entry [ 44 ] , [ 45 ] .
Thus , Fas-resistance can be established in the absence of specific receptor engagement by appropriate stimulation of intracellular mediators .
Btk is an indispensable intermediary in the slg pathway leading to cell cycle progression , as evidenced by the complete failure of S phase entry in B cells from xid mice , in which Btk is mutated , or in B cells from Btk knock-out mice , in which Btk is absent 249 Inducible Fas-resistance in B cells [ 46-48 ] .
In view of the importance of Btk for slg-induced proliferation , the role of Btk in slg signaling for Fas-resistance was examined using B cells from both kinds of mice .
With xid B cells , the levels of Fas-sensitivity produced by CD4O0L stimulation , and of Fas-resistance induced by anti-Ig , were indistinguishable from results obtained with wild-type control B cells .
With Btk knock-out B cells , CD4O0L stimulation produced Fas-sensitivity that was minimally increased ( by 20-30 % ) over that observed with control B cells ; however , there was no difference between B cells obtained from Btk knock-out and from wild-type control mice in the degree of Fas-resistance produced by anti-Ig [ 49 ] .
The unexpected minor increase in Fas-sensitivity in Btk knock-out B cells may relate to the report that Btk binds Fas and interferes with Fas signaling for cell death , although the modulation of Fas-sensitivity observed here in murine B cells was much less impressive than that reported for chicken DT4O B cells [ 50 ] .
The xid and Btk knock-out results together indicate that Btk plays no role in slg signaling for Fas-resistance .
Thus , the signaling pathway that leads from sIg to Fas-resistance differs completely from the route leading from slg to S phase entry , in that Btk is absolutely required for the latter but not at all for the former .
The finding that Fas-resistance develops over a period of hours following anti-Ig treatment suggested that new gene expression might play a key role .
To examine this possibility , B cells were treated with inhibitors of macromolecular synthesis along with anti-Ig during the last 6 h of 48 h cultures with CD4O0L ( longer periods of exposure being precluded by drug toxicity ) ; the addition of either cycloheximide or actinomycin D completely blocked the induction of Fas-resistance by anti-Ig [ 35 ] , [ 51 ] .
Thus , Fas-resistance induced by slg engagement appears to depend on new gene expression and new protein synthesis .
These results also indicate that the mechanism responsible for sIg-induced Fas-resistance in primary B cells differs from that reported for the A20 B cell line , which is not interrupted by cycloheximide [ 52 ] .
The dependence of slg-induced Fas-resistance on new gene expression implies , in turn , a role for factors that transcriptionally activate anti-apoptotic genes .
A candidate factor might be NF- « xB , a transactivating complex that is developmentally regulated and is induced as a result of slg engagement , inasmuch as NF- « B has been reported to regulate the expression of some anti-apoptotic genes , and to influence the Fas-sensitivity of T cell lines [ 53-61 ] .
To evaluate the role of NF-cB , inhibitors of nuclear NF-cB translocation were added along with anti-Ig during the last 12 h of 48 h cultures with CD40L ; the proteasome inhibitor lactacystin [ 62 ] , [ 63 ] and the antioxidant pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate ( PDTC ) [ 64 ] each completely blocked sIg-induced Fas-resistance , while having no effect on the ability of CD4O0L alone to upregulate Fas expression and to produce Fas-sengitivity .
As an important corollary , lactacystin and PDTC also inhibited the activation of NF- « xB that was produced when anti-Ig was added to CD40L-stimulated B cells .
These results with two different inhibitors , operating through two different mechanisms of action , indicate that slg signaling for Fag-resis-tance requires NF- « B activation and is thus NF- « < B-dependent .
Notably , PMA induces 250 Rothstein TL vigorous nuclear translocation of NF- « B in mature B cells but only partial resistance to Fas-mediated apoptosis [ 35 ] , [ 53 ] , suggesting that either NF- « B induction is a necessary but not sufficient condition for Fas-resistance , or that Fas-resistance depends on the induction of sIg-specific « < B-binding complexes .
Recently , two groups reported that sIg-induced NF- « B activation , like sIg-induced proliferation , is Btk-dependent [ 65 ] , [ 66 ] .
In contrast , the experiments discussed above indicate that sIg-induced Fas-resistance requires NF- « B yet takes place in the absence of Btk .
The reason for these seemingly conflicting results remains unclear .
It may be that prior CD40L stimulation establishes a new intracellular signaling pathway through which slg activates NF- « B in the absence of Btk .
Or it may be that induction of Fas-resistance requires only a very minimal threshold level of NF- « B .
Alternatively , inhibitors of NF- < B activation may at the same time inhibit another signaling mediator , and this latter mediator , not NF- « B , is the important molecular effector .
These possibilities are currently being tested .
Two terminal effectors of Fas-resistance : Bel-xi and FLIP The identity of gene products whose synthesis might be responsible for inducible Fas-resistance was sought by testing likely prospects according to two criteria : upregulation of expression under conditions that produce Fas-resistance , and , induction of Fas-resistance by upregulated expression in the absence of receptor engagement .
Initial experiments designed to detect such molecules focused on members of the Bel-2 family , some members of which interfere with mitochondrial cytochrome c release [ 67 ] .
A number of Bel-2- homologous genes were assayed for induction by anti-Ig treatment of CD4O0L-stimulated B cells through RT-PCR .
Only bel-x1 was upregulated .
Bel-x1 expression was strongly induced at the RNA level within an hour of anti-Ig addition , and at the protein level within 6-12 h [ 68 ] .
B cells obtained from Bel-xr-overexpressing transgenic mice were then tested for susceptibility to Thl1 cell mediated cytotoxicity after stimulation by CD40L alone , in order to determine the capacity of Bel-x1 , overexpressed in isolation , to produce Fas-resistance .
These B cells were ( 3-fold ) less sensitive to Fas killing than wild-type littermate control B cells , despite similar levels of upregulated Fas expression , and similar levels of activation as judged by thymidine incorporation [ 68 ] .
Thus , Bel-x1 appears to account for at least a portion of slg-induced Fas-resistance because , expression was upregulated coordinately with induction of Fas-resistance ( in both murine and human B cells , reference [ 69 ] ) , and , because isolated overexpression diminished B cell susceptibility to Fas killing separate and apart from any other potential effects of slg engagement ( although in connection with this last point it should be mentioned that the capacity of Bel-xi to inhibit Fas-mediated apoptosis in B cell lines has been questioned , reference [ 70 ] ) .
Further , the reduction in susceptibility to Th1-induced cytotoxicity produced by Bel-xi suggests that Fas death signaling in B cells involves mitochondrial cytochrome c release ; this notion is supported by our observation that inducibly Fas-resistant B cells are protected against apoptosis produced by C2-ceramide , 251 Inducible Fas-resistance in B cells the cytotoxicity of which has been associated with mitochondrial damage [ 71-75 ] [ 71-75 ] .
There are , however , several indications that Bel-xi does not fully account for Fas-resistance produced by anti-Ig : 1 ) the loss of Fas-sensitivity in ( CD4OL-stimulated ) Bel-xi-overexpressing B cells was incomplete , and was less dramatic than the loss of Fas-sensitivity observed in wild-type B cells stimulated by anti-Ig plus CD40L ; 2 ) anti-Ig treatment of ( CD4O0L-stimulated ) Bel-xr-overexpressing B cells produced a further ( approximately 3-fold ) reduction in the already muted Fas-sensitivity of these B cells ; and , 3 ) Bel-xi1 . }
protein did not appear in normal CD40L-stimulated B cells treated with anti-Ig until after the initial onset of diminished sensitivity to Fas .
These considerations strongly suggest that at least one other anti-Ig-responsive molecule plays a role in blocking Fas killing following slg engagement .
Additional experiments designed to elucidate the identity of gene products potentially responsible for sIg-induced Fas-resistance focused on evaluation of FLIP .
FLIP is a FLICE/caspase 8 homolog that lacks an active enzyme site and thus competitively inhibits downstream signaling that normally occurs following FLICE/caspase 8 binding to FADD [ 76-79 ] .
Our early Northern blot experiments suggested that some FLIP expression was induced by anti-Ig treatment of CD40L-stimulated B cells , but the data were inconclusive owing to the very low level of FLIP expression detected .
However , definitive results were subsequently obtained by RT-PCR , which showed that FLIP RNA expression was induced within an hour of adding anti-Ig to CD40L-stimulated B cells , and that FLIP protein expression was upregulated within 6 h. These results were recently extended by reports indicating that FLIP overexpression interferes with Fas-mediated apoptosis in primary B cells and in B cell lines [ 80 ] , [ 81 ] .
These studies together strongly suggest that FLIP is involved in bringing about sIg-induced resistance to Fas-mediated apoptosis because the two criteria discussed above were met , as described earlier for Bel-x1 : FLIP expression was upregulated coordinately with induction of Fas-resistance by anti-Ig , and isolated FLIP overexpression diminished B cell susceptibility to Fas signaling for cell death .
( In these studies a number of other known anti-apoptotic genes screened as outlined above failed to meet the criterion of expression coincident with induction of Fas-resistance , including A1 , A20 , BAG-1 , Bel-2 , IAP-1 , IAP-2 , Ich-18 , IEX-1L and survivin , references [ 82-90 ] .
Identification of a novel Fas apoptosis inhibitory molecule ( FAIM ) To identify additional genes that might be responsible for resistance to Fas-mediated apoptosis without regard to conserved motifs or known properties , transcripts induced as a result of anti-lg treatment that produces Fas-resistance were detected using a differential display strategy [ 91 ] .
Through this approach , a completely novel 1.2 kb sequence was cloned that contains an open reading frame encoding a protein product of 179 amino acids predicted to reflect a stable , soluble , B-strand-rich molecule that is slightly acidic [ 51 ] .
The function of this gene was evaluated with BAL-17 murine B lymphoma cells , the activation responses of which mimic those of primary B cells in a 252 Rothstein TL number of ways [ 92 ] , including upregulated Fas expression and increased sensitivity to Fas killing following CD40L stimulation .
BAL-17 B cells were transfected with the gene cloned in pBKCMV , or with empty vector , selected in G418 , and then stimulated with CD40L for 24 h and examined for susceptibility to Th1 cell-mediated cytotoxicity .
Cytotoxicity was assessed in two ways , by chromium release after exposure of transfectants to FasL-bearing Th1 effector cells , and by propidium iodide-staining for subdiploid DNA after treatment of transfectants with Jo-2 anti-Fas antibody .
Regardless of the means by which Fas was engaged or cytotoxicity was assessed , Fas-mediated apoptosis was markedly reduced in B cells expressing the gene of interest as compared to vector transfectants , using both G418-resistant pools and stably transfected lines cloned by limiting dilution [ 51 ] .
Considering the dose-response curve with Th1 effector cells , Fas-resistance produced by the gene of interest amounted to a greater than 9-fold level of protection against Fas-mediated apoptosis .
These results indicate that the differentially expressed gene encodes a Fas Apoptosis Inhibitory Molecule , which we termed FAIM .
The anti-apoptotic function of FAIM was demonstrated further at a biochemical level by evaluating cleavage products of poly-ADP ribose polymerase ( PARP ) that result from caspase activation [ 93 , 94 ] .
PARP fragments were detected within 40 minutes of treating vector-transfected BAL-17 B cells with Jo-2 anti-Fas antibody , whereas such fragments were not observed in faim-transfected BAL-17 B cells up to 60 minutes after antibody treatment [ 51 ] .
This correlated well with the transgenically enhanced level of FAIM expression , which was demonstrated by Western blotting to be greatly increased over the endogenous levels present in vector-transfected controls .
These results indicate that FAIM blocks Fas killing by interfering with a step prior to terminal caspase activity .
As might be expected from the original selection conditions for differential display analysis , faim mRNA increased within an hour of adding anti-Ig to CD4O0L-stimulated B cells , and expression continued to rise over the next 5 h , as shown by Northern blotting .
Along the same lines , FAIM protein increased within 6 h of treating CD4O0L-stimulated B cells with anti-Ig , and expression continued to rise , peaking at 12 h , as detected by Western blotting [ 51 ] .
The finding of substantially increased FAIM expression in splenocytes obtained from sheep red blood cell-immune animals , as compared to splenocytes obtained from control animals injected with saline , suggests that these in vitro studies of inducible FAIM expression bear relevance for physiological immune responses .
Thus , upregulation of FAIM expression coincides with B cell treatment by Fas-resistance-inducing regimens in vitro , and with induction of foreign antigen-specific immune responses in vivo .
The murine faim sequence contains no known effector domains ; that is , it lacks kinase or phosphatase domains , caspase or CARD domains , PH or SH2 domains , and so forth .
However , we readily identified highly homologous faim sequences in other species , indicating strong evolutionary conservation [ 51 ] .
Human faim was obtained by constructing a consensus sequence from overlapping expressed sequence tag ( EST ) 253 Inducible Fas-resistance in B cells fragments that share some homology with mouse faim , plus direct sequencing of a single EST clone that completely spans the putative human transcript [ 95 ] .
The predicted amino acid sequence of human FAIM is 90 % identical to the predicted amino acid sequence of mouse FAIM .
These results were extended by Southern analysis showing hybridization by a mouse faim probe to genomic DNA from all mammalian species tested ( human , monkey , rat , mouse , dog , cow , and rabbit ) ( unpublished observations ) .
Worm faim was identified by directly sequencing cDNA amplified by PCR , using primers based on our own manual analysis of the putative exonic structure of a C. elegans genomic sequence of unknown function that contains discrete regions of homology with mouse faim .
The predicted amino acid sequence of C. elegans FAIM is 50 % identical to the predicted amino acid sequence of mouse FAIM .
Fly faim was obtained by computer-aided searching of the recently posted D. melanogaster genome , using accepted algorithms to define putative exon/intron structure .
The putative predicted amino acid sequence of D. melanogaster FAIM is 36 % identical to the predicted amino acid sequence of mouse FAIM , with the caveat that the fly sequence has not been amplified directly from cDNA [ 96 ] .
Examination of the predicted FAIM sequences from these 4 species indicates that specific regions of very high identity exist within the amino terminal region that likely represent novel anti-apoptotic effector domains or domains required for FAIM association with another mediator or modulator protein .
Two distinct short stretches of 12 and 13 amino acids each are 69-75 % identical across all four species [ 96 ] .
The evolutionary conservation of faim strongly suggests that the faim gene product is an important regulatory molecule that has been favored for retention throughout phylogeny , and thus likely plays a key role in cellular viability or other processes .
( Since there is no known Fas homolog in C. elegans or D. melanogaster , it is presumed that FAIM carries out a similar , but possibly not Fas-specific , anti-apoptotic function in the worm and the fly . )
Two other characteristics of FAIM suggest that it plays an important role in regulating cellular processes .
1 ) The faim gene is broadly expressed .
High level faim gene expression was documented in murine brain , thymus , kidney and spleen by Northern blotting , and in additional normal tissues by RT-PCR [ 51 ] , [ 96 ] , suggesting that FAIM performs an essential function in non-lymphoid , as well as in lymphoid , cells .
2 ) The faim gene localizes to a cytogenetic region associated with disease .
Human faim was localized to chromosome 3422-25 by fluorescence in situ hybridization ( FISH ) , and to chromosome 3q25 by radiation hybrid analysis of a faim-containing EST [ 96 ] .
This region contains loci associated with B cell lymphoma , acute non-lymphocytic leukemia , and squamous cell carcinoma of the lung [ 97-99 ] .
The mechanism by which mutation of a gene that blocks Th1 cell-mediated cytotoxicity might inure to the benefit of malignant cells is speculative at best , but such changes might increase the level of FAIM expression or enhance the anti-apoptotic activity of FAIM .
Recently , inhibition of Fas-mediated apoptosis by overexpression of FLIP was shown to increase lymphoma tum-origenicity [ 100 ] , [ 101 ] , supporting the concept that modulation of Fas signaling for cell 254 Rothstein TL death plays a role in determining the effectiveness of anti-tumor immunity , and providing a rationale for a connection between tumor-associated loci and anti-apoptotic genes like faim .
During our initial cloning efforts the faim sequence was obtained from two sources-a mouse thymus library and , subsequently , a mouse brain library .
However , the two sequences differ .
The original thymus-derived FAIM sequence , now termed FAIM-Short ( FAIM-S ) , is shorter by 22 5 amino acids in comparison to the brain-derived sequence , now termed FAIM-Long ( FAIM- L ) [ 96 ] .
Recently we identified a human faim-L homolog among publicly available EST fragments , which similarly encodes 22 additional 5 amino acids , 21 of which are identical to the additional sequence in murine FAIM-L , indicating a high degree of homology in this region , although this sequence contains no presently recognized effector motifs .
To clarify the origin of the two faim sequences , the mouse faim genomic locus was characterized [ 96 ] .
Mouse faim was localized to a region ( 9f1 ) syntenic to the chromosomal location of human faim by FISH analysis .
Three BAC clones containing the faim locus were obtained by screening a murine 1298y genomic library , and one of these clones was used as a template for analysis .
All intron/ exon boundaries were confirmed by direct sequencing [ 102 ] .
The murine faim locus was shown to consist of 6 exons .
Exons IV and VI in M. musculus were each found to represent the fusion of 2 exons identified in C. elegans , so that the intron/exon organization is simplified in the higher organism , which although unusual is not unprec- [ 103-107 ] .
Two putative translation initiation sites were identified on separate exons ( II and III ) , indicating that faim-L and faim-S result from alternative splicing .
Through PCR amplification utilizing a 5° primer that corresponds to the 5° untranslated region , faim-L was shown to be expressed in primary tissue , although among multiple tissues examined , expression of faim-L was extremely tissue-specific , and was strictly limited to the brain [ 96 ] .
The function of FAIM-L is presently unknown , and the possibility that FAIM-L is active only in the brain , or that FAIM-L fulfills a unique role in the brain , has not been ruled out .
These results indicate that faim is a novel gene without precedent in publicly available databases , whose protein product inhibits Fas-mediated apoptosis , and whose expression is upregulated coordinately with induction of Fasg-resistance by slg engagement in vitro and during antigen-specific immune responses in vivo .
These features suggest that FAIM is involved in the physiological regulation of immune cell activity , inducibly suppressing Fas signaling for cell death along with and FLIP .
The multigenic nature of sIg-induced Fas-resistance suggests , in a larger sense , that the relative susceptibility of B cells to Fas-mediated apoptosis is determined by the balance between multiple pro- and anti-apoptotic molecules , whose expression changes rapidly in response to shifting environmental conditions , such as the presence of antigen and/ or T cell-derived lymphokine .
255 Inducible Fas-resistance in B cells Speculative role for Fas-resistance T cell activation results in upregulation of CD4O0L expression [ 108-110 ] , as well as upregulation of FasL expression [ 8 ] , [ 1111-114 ] .
As much as engagement of ( constitutively expressed ) B cell CD40 is necessary for T-dependent stimulation , CD40 triggering also upregulates Fas expression , and engagement of B cell Fas by T cell FasL initiates apoptotic events .
In view of this , activated T cells represent a potential threat to B cell viability , and this may well be the point at which inducible Fas-resistance plays a key role , by protecting B cells against FasL expressed by interacting Th1 cells and thereby promoting B cell immune responses .
Two manifestations of this have been documented .
1 ) Fas-resistant B cells present antigen more effectively than Fas-sensitive B cells .
This was demonstrated by experiments in which antigen-pulsed , mitomycin-treated Fas-resistant B cells produced greater proliferation of antigen-specific Th1 cells than did similarly treated , Fas-sensitive B cells [ 115 ] ; improved antigen presentation presumably occurred because Fas-resistant B cells were protected against the threat of death posed by initially activated T cells , and thus remained viable to present antigen to another round of T cells .
2 ) Fas-resistant B cells block activation-induced cell death ( AICD ) of T cells , whereas Fas-sensitive B cells do not .
This was demonstrated by experiments in which primed T cells were exposed a second time to antigen ( SEB or HEL ) presented by B cells ; the resulting Fas-induced cytotoxicity ( AICD ) of T cells was markedly reduced when antigen was presented by Fas-resistant B cells , presumably because Fas-bearing , apoptosis-resistant B cells competitively inhibited T cell FasL , preventing interaction with T cell Fas [ 116 ] .
These results suggest that Fas-resistance induced in B cells may enhance and perpetuate T , as well as B , cell responses .
The idea that inducible Fas-resistance modulates B and T cell deletion , and promotes B and T cell responses , is further supported , somewhat indirectly , by the observed durability of the receptor-specific phenotype , which was unchanged when B cells were washed and re-cultured for 24 h in medium prior to assay of Th1 cell-mediated cytotoxicity .
Fas-resistance in tolerant B cells The model described above , which suggests that inducible Fas-resistance acts to protect B cells from FasL-bearing , activated T cells , raises the issue of autoreactive B cells , the very B cells that are dysregulated in the absence of Fas expression .
Inasmuch as these B cells appear to be eliminated in a Fas-dependent fashion [ 15 ] , [ 117-121 ] , the induction of Fas-resistance ( as a result of interaction with ever present self antigen ) could lead to deleterious consequences , because of the possibility that normal processes of autoreactive B cell deletion might be thwarted .
It would seem necessary for the rules governing the regulation of Fas-mediated apoptosis to be different for autoreactive B cells in comparison to normal ( foreign antigen-specific ) B cells .
To address this issue , B cells were obtained from transgenic mice expressing anti-HEL antigen receptors , and from double transgenic mice that express both the anti-HEL receptor as well as a transgene encoding soluble HEL ( anti-HEL/sHEL ) .
B cells 256 Rothstein TL from anti-HEL/sHEL mice are continually exposed to what is , for them , autoantigen , as a result of which these transgenically autoreactive B cells are tolerant , and thus do not signal normally through sIg [ 122-124 ] .
B cells from both kinds of transgenic mice were stimulated with CD4O0L alone or with CD4O0L in combination with soluble HEL , and tested for susceptibility to Fas-mediated apoptosis .
The addition of soluble HEL produced resistance to Fas killing only in B cells from anti-HEL mice ; there was no effect of sHEL on the Fas-sensitivity of CD40L-stimulated B cells from anti-HEL/sHEL mice , despite the fact that upregulated levels of Fas expression and Fas-sensitivity produced by CD4O0L were similar for B cells obtained from single transgenic and double transgenic mice [ 36 ] .
Thus , specific antigen differentially induced Fas-resistance in non-autoreactive and in autoreactive B cells , succeeding in the former but failing in the latter .
However , it was noted that anti-Ig produced similar levels of Fas-resistance in CD40L-stimulated B cells from single and double transgenic mice , suggesting that autoreactive B cells are not totally intractable to induction of Fas-resistance through sIg signaling but , instead , may simply require a higher degree of slg crosslinking for this outcome .
To examine this issue , B cells from anti-HEL/sHEL mice were stimulated with CD4O0L alone or with CD40L in combination with biotinylated sHEL , with or without additional crosslinking imposed by streptavidin .
In the presence of streptavidin , autoreactive B cells from anti-HEL/sHEL mice acquired resistance to Fas-mediated apoptosis , similar in magnitude to that produced by anti-Ig [ 36 ] .
These results strongly suggest that in autoreactive B cells an elevated threshold of slg signaling must be exceeded for induction of Fas-resistance , as compared to the degree of sIg signaling needed for induction of Fas-resistance in foreign-antigen-specific B cells .
In this way the possibility that self antigen might induce Fas-resistance through sIg signaling in autoreactive B cells is minimized , and sIg-induced Fas-resistance is unlikely to contribute to serological autoimmunity under normal circumstances .
The situation with IL-4 is very different .
Similar levels of Fas-resistance were produced by IL-4 in CD4O0L-stimulated B cells obtained from single and double transgenic mice [ 36 ] .
Thus , the capacity of IL-4R engagement to produce Fas-resistance was not altered in autoreactive B cells .
These results suggest the possibility that autoreactive B cells might escape Fas-dependent deletion because of IL-4R signaling ( which , under normal circumstances , would be averted by mechanisms that maintain T cell tolerance ) .
In support of this notion , serum samples ( 5 out of 5 tested ) obtained from IL-4-overexpressing transgenic mice [ 125 ] were found to contain autoantibodies by indirect immunofluorescence on HEp-2 cells [ 37 ] .
HEp-2-staining serum autoantibodies were similarly reported in sera obtained from a separate IL-4 transgenic line [ 126 ] .
More recently , the role of IL-4 has been examined using the defined anti-HEL/sHEL system by breeding triple transgenic ( anti-HEL/sHEL/IL-4 ) animals and then testing sera for anti-HEL antibody .
Preliminary results indicate that these mice ( 10 out of 10 examined ) produced increasing amounts of serum anti-HEL autoantibody with increasing age , and in so doing broke tolerance .
Although none of these studies precludes the possibil- 257 Inducible Fas-resistance in B cells ity that IL-4 affects a non-B cell target , all are consistent with the ability of IL-4 to induce Fas-resistance and thereby interfere with the known Fas-deletional pathway for elimination of autoreactive B cells .
This conclusion is supported by the observation that constitutive expression of B7.2 led to a breakdown in tolerance in anti-HEL/sHEL transgenic mice [ 127 ] , which our results infer was due to complete stimulation of T cells to produce IL-4 which in turn induced B cell Fas-resistance .
The results discussed above suggest that induction of Fas-resistance , dysregulation of autoreactive B cells and disruption of B cell tolerance , along with the appearance of autoantibodies , could result either from slg stimulation that exceeds a certain threshold , as might be produced by immune complexes , or from IL-4R engagement not directly related to cognate interactions , as might occur during periods of heightened immuno-logical stress that may be accompanied by lymphokine overproduction [ 128 ] .
SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION The most important conclusion to be drawn from these studies is that B cells are not monomorphic targets for Th1 cell-mediated cytotoxicity but rather modulate their own intrinsic susceptibility to Fas-mediated apoptosis in response to specific environmental cues in a dynamic fashion in which Fas- sensitivity changes rapidly as a result of specific receptor binding .
Engagement of the B cell antigen receptor or the IL-4 receptor triggers at least partially non-overlapping , inducible pathways that result in a durable state of Fas-resistance that is mediated by Bel-xL , FLIP , and FAIM , and possibly other molecules that are as yet unknown .
Fas-resistance likely plays an important role during critical , early B cell : T cell interactions , protecting B cells from the inherent threat to survival posed by FasL expression on the part of activated T cells .
In this way inducible Fas-resistance is hypothesized to enhance serological immune responses and , perhaps , to promote T cell responses by improving antigen presentation and by blocking AICD .
Notably , Fas-resistance , as represented by the absence of functional Fas expression in mutant mice or by overexpression of FLIP in retrovirally transduced chimeras , produces serological autoreactivity , and thus may constitute an etiologic factor in clinically important autoimmunity [ 26 ] , [ 28 ] , [ 80 ] .
In other words , the presence or absence of receptor-induced Fas-resistance is likely to be a key element in determining the usefulness or aberrance of real world immune responses .
Modulation of Fas-sensitivity is not limited to B cells .
T cells may upregulate Fas expression but still fail to undergo apoptosis in response to Fas signaling .
This occurs shortly after activation through the T cell receptor in vitro .
With time and continued stimulation , the Fas-resistant phenotype reverses , and T cells become Fas-sensitive , without any change in the elevated level of Fas expression , perhaps as a result of IL-2R signaling and alterations in the levels of Bel-xL and FLIP , although the precise mechanism remains uncertain [ 76 ] , [ 129-133 ] .
Additional reports suggest that Fas-sensitivity is modulated in anergic T cells , memory T cells , primed T cells and Th2 cells [ 134-139 ] .
258 Rothstein TL Thus , inducible changes in the sensitivity of T cells to Fas-mediated apoptosis likely play a role in T cell homeostasis and in T cell immune responses .
Malignant cells , both lymphoid and non-lymphoid , manifest resistance to Fas-mediated apoptosis [ 140-149 ] .
Inasmuch as inhibition of Fas signaling for cell death is associated with tumor development and progression , it appears that Fas-mediated apoptosis constitutes at least a portion of anti-tumor immunity , and that some malignancies take advantage of mechanisms that block Fas killing to maintain viability and co-exist within the framework of a normal immune system [ 100,101 ] , [ 150-153 ] .
The mechanisms utilized by malignant cells may represent perversions of the physiological means by which B cells normally inhibit susceptibility to Fas-mediated apoptosis in a receptor-specific fashion .
If true , molecules involved in establishing sIg-induced Fas-resistance might form targets for pharmacologic manipulation of the apoptotic balance between host and tumor , including NF- « B , Bel-x1 , FLIP , and/or FAIM [ 51,56 , 68,76,154 , 155 ] .
The sum of the work described above , in conjunction with evidence provided by other investigators , strongly suggests that the regulation and dysregulation of Fas-mediated apoptosis contributes to the level and importance of normal immune , autoimmune , and tumor-immune responses .
New insights are likely to arise from further study of the inter-relationships between surface receptor engagement and susceptibility to Fas signaling , and of mechanisms and molecules responsible for inducible Fas-resistance , which may provide new targets for influencing normal and abnormal immune activity .
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work was supported by United States Public Health Service grants AI40181 and AlT45112 awarded by the National Institutes of Health and by a grant from the Arthritis Foundation .
REFERENCES [ 1 ] Yonehara S , Ishii A , Yonehara M. A cell-killing monoclonal antibody ( anti-Fas ) to a cell surface antigen co-downregulated with the receptor of tumor necrosis factor .
J Exp Med 1989 ; 169:1747-56 .
[ 2 ] Trauth BC , Klas C , Peters AM , et al .
Monoclonal antibody- mediated tumor regression by induction of apoptosis .
Science 1989 ; 245:301-5 .
[ 3 ] Nagata S. Apoptosis by death factor .
Cell 1997 ; 88:355-65 .
[ 4 ] Chinnaiyan AM , O'Rourke K , Yu GL , et al .
Signal transduction by DR3 , a death domain-containing receptor related to TNFR-1 and CD95 .
Science 1996 ; , B .
274:990-2 .
[ 5 ] Chaudhary PM , Eby M , Jasmin A , Bookwalter A , Murray J , Hood L. Death receptor 5 , a new member of the TNFR family , and DR4 induce FADD- dependent apoptosis and activate the NF- x B pathway .
Immunity 1997 ; 7:821-30 .
[ 6 ] Schneider P , Thome M , Burns K , et al .
TRAIL receptors 1 ( DR4 ) and 2 ( DR5 ) signal FADD-dependent apoptosis and activate NF- x B .
Immunity 1997 ; 7:831-6 .
[ 7 ] Yeh WC , Pompa JL , McCurrach ME , et al .
FADD : essential for embryo development and signaling from some , but not all , inducers of apoptosis .
Science 1998 ; 279:1954-8 .
259 Inducible Fas-resistance in B cells [ 8 ] Suda T , Okazaki T , Naito Y , et al .
Expression of the Fas ligand in cells of T cell lineage .
J Immunol 1995 ; 154:3806-13 .
[ 9 ] Smyth MJ , Sutton VR , Kershaw MH , Trapani JA .
Xenospecific cytotoxic T lymphocytes use perforin-and Fas-mediated lytic pathways .
Transplantation 1996 ; 62:1529-32 .
[ 10 ] Hahn S , Gehri R , Erb P. Mechanism and biological significance of CD4-mediated cytotoxicity .
Immunol Rev 1995 ; 146:57-79 .
[ 11 ] Arase H , Arase N , Saito T. Fas-mediated cytotoxicity by freshly isolated natural killer cells .
J Exp Med 1995 ; 181:1235-8 .
[ 12 ] Montel AH , Bochan MR , Hobbs JA , Lynch DH , Brahmi Z. Fas involvement in cytotoxicity mediated by human NK cells .
Cell Immunol 1995 ; 166:236-46 .
[ 13 ] Oshimi Y , Oda S , Honda Y , Nagata S , Miyazaki S. Involvement of Fas ligand and Fas-mediated pathway in the cytotoxicity of human natural killer cells .
J Immunol 1996 ; 157:2909-15 .
[ 14 ] Cohen PL , Eisenberg RA .
Lpr and gld : single gene models of systemic autoimmunity and lymphoproliferative disease .
Annu Rev Immunol 1991 ; 9:243-69 .
[ 15 ] Watanabe-Fukunaga R , Brannan CI , Copeland NG , Jenkins NA , Nagata S. Lymphoproliferation disorder in mice explained by defects in Fas antigen that mediates apoptosis .
Nature 1992 ; 856:314-7 .
[ 16 ] Takahashi T , Tanaka M , Brannan CI , et al .
Generalized lymphoproliferative disease in mice , caused by a point mutation in the Fas ligand .
Cell 1994 ; 76:969-76 .
[ 17 ] Fisher GH , Rosenberg FJ , Straus SE , et al .
Dominant interfering Fas gene mutations impair apoptosis in a human autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome .
Cell 1995 ; 81:985-46 .
[ 18 ] Rieux-Laucat F , Le Deist F , Hivroz C , et al .
Mutations in Fas associated with human lymphoproliferative syndrome and autoimmunity .
Science 1995 ; 268:1347-9 .
[ 19 ] Drappa J , Vaishnaw AK , Sullivan KE , Chu JL , Elkon KB .
Fas gene mutations in the Canale-Smith syndrome , an inherited lymphoproliferative disorder associated with autoimmunity [ see comments ] .
N Engl J Med 1996 ; 385:1643-9 .
[ 20 ] Wu J , Wilson J , He J , Xiang L , Schur PH , Mountz JD .
Fas ligand mutation in a patient with systemic lupus erythematosus and lymphoproliferative disease .
J Clin Invest 1996 ; 98:1107-13 .
[ 21 ] Le Deist F , Emile JF , Rieux- Laucat F , et al .
Clinical , immunological , and pathological consequences of Fas-deficient conditions .
Lancet 1996 ; 348:719-23 .
[ 22 ] Wang J , Zheng L , Lobito A , et al .
Inherited human Caspase 10 mutations underlie defective lymphocyte and dendritic cell apoptosis in autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome type II .
Cell 1999 ; 98:47-58 .
[ 23 ] Nagata S , Suda T. Fas and Fas ligand : lpr and gld mutations .
Immunol Today 1995 ; 16:39-43 .
[ 24 ] Adachi M , SuematsuS , Suda T , et al .
Enhanced and accelerated lymphoproliferation in Fas-null mice .
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996 ; 93:2131-6 .
[ 25 ] Perkins DL , Michaelson J , Glaser RM , Marshak-Rothstein A .
Selective elimination of non- Ipr lymphoid cells in mice undergoing Ipr-mediated graft-vs-host disease .
J Immunol 1987 ; 189:1406-13 .
[ 26 ] Nemazee D , Guiet C , Buerki K , Marshak-Rothstein A .
B lymphocytes from the autoimmune-prone mouse strain MLR/ lpr manifest an intrinsic defect in tetraparental MRL/ lpr in equilibrium DBA/2 chimeras .
J Immunol 1991 ; 147:2536-9 .
[ 27 ] Sobel ES , Kakkaaiah VN , Schiffenbauer J , Reap EA , Cohen PL , Eisenberg RA .
Novel immunoregulatory B cell pathways revealed by lpr-+ mixed chimeras .
J Immunol 1998 ; 160:1497-503 .
[ 28 ] Fukuyama H , Adachi M , Suematsu S , et al .
Transgenic expression of Fas in T cells blocks lymphoproliferation but not autoimmune disease in MRL - lpr mice .
J Immunol 1998 ; 160:3805-11 .
[ 29 ] Stalder T , Hahn S , Erb P. Fas antigen is the major target molecule for CD4+ T cell-mediated cytotoxicity .
J Immunol 1994 ; 152:1127-33 .
[ 30 ] Ju ST , Cui H , Panka DJ , Ettinger R , Marshak-Rothstein A .
Participation of target Fas protein in apoptosis pathway induced by CD4+ Th1 and CD8+ cytotoxic T cells .
Proc Natl Acad Sei USA 1994 ; 91:4185-9 .
260 Rothstein TL [ 31 ] Daniel PT , Krammer PH .
Activation induces sensitivity toward APO-1 ( CD95 ) -mediated apoptosis in human B cells .
J Immunol 1994 ; 152:5624-32 .
[ 32 ] Watanabe D , Suda T , Nagata S. Expression of Fas in B cells of the mouse germinal center and Fas-dependent killing of activated B cells .
Int Immunol 1995 ; 7:1949-56 .
[ 33 ] Onel KB , Tucek-Szabo CL , Ashany D , Lacy E , Nikolic-Zugic J , Elkon KB .
Expression and function of the murine CD95/FasR/APO-1 receptor in relation to B cell ontogeny .
Eur J Immunol 1995 ; 25:2940-7 .
[ 34 ] Rothstein TL , Wang JK , Panka DJ , et al .
Protection against Fas-dependent Th1-mediated apoptosis by antigen receptor engagement in B cells .
Nature 1995 ; 874:163-5 .
[ 35 ] Foote LC , Schneider TJ , Fischer GM , et al .
Intracellular signaling for inducible antigen receptor-mediated Fas resistance in B cells .
J Immunol 1996 ; 157:1878-85 .
[ 36 ] Foote LC , Marshak-Rothstein A , Rothstein TL .
Tolerant B lymphocytes acquire resistance to Fas-mediated apoptosis after treatment with interleukin 4 but not after treatment with specific antigen unless a surface immunoglobulin threshold is exceeded .
J Exp Med 1998 ; 187:847-53 .
[ 37 ] Foote LC , Howard RG , Marshak-Rothstein A , Rothstein TL .
IL-4 induces Fas resistance in B cells .
J Immunol 1996 ; 157:2749-53 .
[ 38 ] Schattner EJ , Elkon KB , Yoo DH , et al .
CD40 ligation induces Apo- 1/Fas expression on human B lymphocytes and facilitates apoptosis through the Apo-1/Fas pathway .
J Exp Med 1995 ; 182:1557-65 .
[ 39 ] Garrone P , Neidhardt EM , Garcia E , Galibert L , van Kooten C , Banchereau J. Fas ligation induces apoptosis of CD40-activated human B lymphocytes .
J Exp Med 1995 ; 182:1265-73 .
[ 40 ] Lagresle C , Mondiere P , Bella C , Krammer PH , Defrance T. Concurrent engagement of CD40 and the antigen receptor protects naive and memory human B cells from APO-1/Fas-mediated apoptosis .
J Exp Med 1996 ; 183:1377-88 .
[ 41 ] Rathmell JC , Townsend SE , Xu JC , Flavell RA , Goodnow CC .
Expansion or elimination of B cells in vivo : dual roles for CD4Q0- and Fas ( CD95 ) -ligands modulated by the B cell antigen receptor .
Cell 1996 ; 87:319-29 .
[ 42 ] Wurster AL , Rothstein TL , Grusby MJ .
IL-4 protects primary B cells from apoptosis through Stat6-dependent upregulation of Bel-xL .
Submitted .
[ 43 ] Karras JG , Wang Z , Coniglio SJ , Frank DA , Rothstein TL .
Antigen-receptor engagement in B cells induces nuclear expression of STATS and STAT6 proteins that bind and transactivate an IFN- y activation site .
J Immunol 1996 ; 157:39-47 .
[ 44 ] Klaus GG , O'Garra A , Bijsterbosch MK , Holman M. Activation and proliferation signals in mouse B cells .
VIII .
Induction of DNA synthesis in B cells by a combination of calcium ionophores and phorbol myristate acetate .
Eur J Immunol 1986 ; 16:92-7 .
[ 45 ] Rothstein TL , Backer TR , Miller RA , Kolber DL .
Stimulation of murine B cells by the combination of calcium ionophore plus phorbol ester .
Cell Immunol 1986 ; 102:364-73 .
[ 46 ] Sieckmann DG , Asofsky R , Mosier DE , Zitron IM , Paul .
Activation of mouse lymphocytes by anti-immunoglobulin .
L. Parameters of the proliferative response .
J Exp Med 1978 ; 147:814-29 .
[ 47 ] Rawlings DJ , Saffran DC , Tsukada S , et al .
Mutation of unique region of Bruton ' s tyrosine kinase in immunodeficient XID mice .
Science 1998 ; 261:358-61 .
[ 48 ] Khan WN , Alt FW , Gerstein RM , et al .
Defective B cell development and function in Btk-deficient mice .
Immunity 1995 ; 8:283-99 .
[ 49 ] Negm RS , Schneider TJ , Colarusso TP , Woodland RT , Rothstein TL .
Btk does not regulate susceptibility to Fas-mediated apoptosis nor inducible Fas-resistance in murine B cells .
In preparation 2000 ; .
[ 50 ] Vassilevy A , Ozer Z , Navara C , Mahajan S , Uckun FM .
Bruton ' s tyrosine kinase as an inhibitor of the Fas/CD95 death-inducing signaling complex .
J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274:1646-56 .
[ 51 ] Schneider TJ , Fischer GM , Donohoe TJ , Colarusso TP , Rothstein TL .
A novel gene coding for a Fas apoptosis inhibitory molecule ( FAIM ) isolated from inducibly Fas-resistant B lymphocytes .
J Exp Med 1999 ; 189:949-56 .
261 Inducible Fas-resistance in B cells [ 52 ] Catlett IM , Bishop GA .
Cutting edge : a novel mechanism for rescue of B cells from CD95/Fas-mediated apoptosis .
J Immunol 1999 ; 163:2378-81 .
[ 53 ] Liu JL , Chiles TC , Sen RJ , Rothstein TL .
Inducible nuclear expression of NF- « B in primary B cells stimulated through the surface Ig receptor .
J Immunol 1991 ; 146:1685-91 .
[ 54 ] Rooney JW , Dubois PM , Sibley CH .
Cross-linking of surface IgM activates NF- x B in B lymphocyte .
Eur J Immunol 1991 ; 21:2993-8 .
[ 55 ] Ghosh S. Regulation of inducible gene expression by the transcription factor NF- « B. Immunol Res 1999 ; 19:183-9 .
[ 56 ] Jeremias I , Kupatt C , Baumann B , Herr I , Wirth T , Debatin KM .
Inhibition of nuclear factor « B activation attenuates apoptosis resistance in lymphoid cells .
Blood 1998 ; 91:4624-31 .
[ 57 ] Dudley E , Hornung F , Zheng L , Scherer D , Ballard D , Lenardo M. NF- « B regulates Fas/APO-1/CD95-and TCR-mediated apoptosis of T lymphocytes .
Eur J Immunol 1999 ; 29:878-86 .
[ 58 ] Zong WX , Edelstein LC , Chen C , Bash J , Gelinas C. The prosurvival Bel-2 homolog Bfl-1/A1 is a direct transcriptional target of NF- « B that blocks TNF @ -induced apoptosis .
Genes Dev 1999 ; 13 : 382-7 .
[ 59 ] Grumont RJ , Rourke IJ , Gerondakis S. Rel-dependent induction of A1 transcription is required to protect B cells from antigen receptor ligation-induced apoptosis .
Genes Dev 1999 ; 13:400-11 .
[ 60 ] Lee HH , Dadgostar H , Cheng Q , Shu J , Cheng G. NF- x B-mediated up-regulation of Bel-x and Bfl-1/A1 is required for CD40 survival signaling in B lymphocytes .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999 ; 96:9136-41 .
[ 61 ] Wang CY , Guttridge DC , Mayo MW , Baldwin AS , Jr. NF- x B induces expression of the Bel-2 homologue A1/Bfl-1 to preferentially suppress chemotherapy-induced apoptosis .
Mol Cell Biol 1999 ; 19:5923-9 .
[ 62 ] ) Fenteany G , Standaert RF , Lane WS , Choi S , Corey EJ , Schreiber SL .
Inhibition of proteasome activities and subunit-specific amino-terminal threonine modification by lactacystin .
Science 1995 ; 268:726-31 .
[ 63 ] Matsui K , Omura S , Cui H , Schauer SL , Sonenshein GE , Ju ST. Proteasome regulation of Fas ligand cytotoxicity .
Eur J Immunol 1997 ; 27:2269-78 .
[ 64 ] Schreck R , Meier B , Mannel DN , Droge W , Baeuerle PA. Dithiocarbamates as potent inhibitors of nuclear factor ® B activation in intact cells .
J Exp Med 1992 ; 175:1181-94 .
[ 65 ] Bajpai UD , Zhang K , Teutsch M , Sen R , Wortis HH .
Bruton 's tyrosine kinase links the B cell receptor to nuclear factor ® B activation .
J Exp Med 2000 ; 191:1735-44 .
[ 66 ] Petro JB , Rahman SM , Ballard DW , Khan WN .
Bruton 's tyrosine kinase is required for activation of I x B kinase and nuclear factor < B in response to B cell receptor engagement .
J Exp Med 2000 ; 191 : 1745-54 .
[ 67 ] Yang E , Korsmeyer SJ .
Molecular thanatopsis : a discourse on the BCL2 family and cell death .
Blood 1996 ; 88:386-401 .
[ 68 ] Schneider TJ , Grillot D , Foote LC , Nunez GE , Rothstein TL .
Bel-x protects primary B cells against Fas-mediated apoptosis .
J Immunol 1997 ; 159:4834-9 .
[ 69 ] Zhang X , Li L , Choe J , et al .
Up-regulation of Bel-xL expression protects CD4O-activated human B cells from Fas-mediated apoptosis .
Cell Immunol 1996 ; 178:149-54 .
[ 70 ] Huang DC , Hahne M , Schroeter M , et al .
Activation of Fas by FasL induces apoptosis by a mechanism that can not be blocked by Bel-2 or Bel-x ( L ) .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999 ; 96:14871-6 .
[ 71 ] Zamzami N , Marchetti P , Castedo M , et al .
Sequential reduction of mitochondrial transmembrane potential and generation of reactive oxygen species in early programmed cell death .
J Exp Med 1995 ; 182:367-77 .
[ 72 ] Decaudin D , Geley S , Hirsch T , et al .
Bel-2 and Bel-XL antagonize the mitochondrial dysfunction preceding nuclear apoptosis induced by chemotherapeutic agents .
Cancer Res 1997 ; 57:62-7 .
[ 73 ] Arora AS , Jones BJ , Patel TC , Bronk SF , Gores GJ .
Ceramide induces hepatocyte cell death through disruption of mitochondrial function in the rat .
Hepatology 1997 ; 25:958-63 .
262 Rothstein TL [ 74 ] Gudz TI , Tserng KY , Hoppel CL .
Direct inhibition of mitochondrial respiratory chain complex III by cell-permeable ceramide .
J Biol Chem 1997 ; 272:24154-8 .
[ 75 ] Scaffidi C , Schmitz I , Zha J , Korsmeyer SJ , Krammer PH , Peter ME .
Differential modulation of apoptosis sensitivity in CD95 type I and type II cells .
J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274:22582-8 .
[ 76 ] Irmler M , Thome M , Hahne M , et al .
Inhibition of death receptor signals by cellular FLIP [ see comments ] .
Nature 1997 ; 888:190-5 .
[ 77 } Hu S , Vincenz C , Ni J , Gentz R , Dixit VM .
I-FLICE , a novel inhibitor of tumor necrosis factor receptor-1- and CD- 95-induced apoptosis .
J Biol Chem 1997 ; 272:17255-7 .
[ 78 ] Srinivasula SM , Ahmad M , Ottilie S , et al .
FLAME-1 , a novel FADD-like anti-apoptotic molecule that regulates Fas/TNFR1-induced apoptosis .
J Biol Chem 1997 ; 272:18542-5 .
[ 79 ] Goltsevy YV , Kovalenko AV , Arnold E , Varfolomeev EE , Brodianskii VM , Wallach D. CASH , a novel caspase homologue with death effector domains .
J Biol Chem 1997 ; 272:19641-4 .
[ 80 ] Van Parijs L , Refaeli Y , Abbas AK , Baltimore D. Autoimmunity as a consequence of retrovirus-mediated expression of C-FLIP in lymphocytes .
Immunity 1999 ; 11:763-70 .
[ 81 ] Wang J , Lobito AA , Shen F , Hornung F , Winoto A , Lenardo MJ .
Inhibition of Fas-mediated apoptosis by the B cell antigen receptor through c-FLIP .
Eur J Immunol 2000 ; 30:155-63 .
[ 82 ] Lin EY , Orlofsky A , Berger MS , Prystowsky MB .
Characterization of A1 , a novel hemopoietic-specific early-response gene with sequence similarity to bel-2 .
J Immunol 1993 ; 151:1979-88 .
[ 83 ] Krikos A , Laherty CD , Dixit VM .
Transcriptional activation of the tumor necrosis factor « -inducible zinc finger protein , A20 , is mediated by « B elements .
J Biol Chem 1992 ; 267:17971-6 .
[ 84 ] Takayama S , Sato T , Krajewski S , et al .
Cloning and functional analysis of BAG-1 : a novel Bel-2-binding protein with anti-cell death activity .
Cell 1995 ; 80:279-84 .
[ 85 ] Pegoraro L , Palumbo A , Erikson J , et al .
A 14 ; 18 and an 8 ; 14 chromosome translocation in a cell line derived from an acute B-cell leukemia .
Proc Natl Acad Sei USA 1984 ; 81:7166-70 .
[ 86 ] Hockenbery D , Nunez G , Milliman C , Schreiber RD , Korsmeyer SJ .
Bel-2 is an inner mitochondrial membrane protein that blocks programmed cell death .
Nature 1990 ; 348:334-6 .
[ 87 ] Rothe M , Pan MG , Henzel WJ , Ayres TM , Goeddel DV .
The TNFR2-TRAF signaling complex contains two novel proteins related to baculoviral inhibitor of apoptosis proteins .
Cell 1995 ; 83:1248-52 .
[ 88 ] Wang L , Miura M , Bergeron L , Zhu H , Yuan J. Ich-1 , an Ice/ced-3-related gene , encodes both positive and negative regulators of programmed cell death .
Cell 1994 ; 78:7839-50 .
[ 89 ] Wu MX , Ao Z , Prasad KV , Wu R , Schlossman SF .
IEX-1L , an apoptosis inhibitor involved in NF- $ \kappa $ B-mediated cell survival .
Science 1998 ; 281:998-1001 .
[ 90 ] Ambrosini G , Adida C , Altieri DC .
A novel anti-apoptosis gene , survivin , expressed in cancer and lymphoma .
Nat Med 1997 ; 8:917-21 .
[ 91 ] Liang P , Pardee AB .
Differential display of eukaryotic messenger RNA by means of the polymerase chain reaction [ see comments ] .
Science 1992 ; 257:967-71 .
[ 92 ] Mizuguchi J , Ji YY , Nakabayaschi H , et al .
Protein kinase C activation blocks anti-IgM-mediated signaling BAL17 B lymphoma cells .
J Immunol 1987 ; 139:1054-9 .
[ 93 ] Tewari M , Quan LT , O'Rourke K , et al .
Yama/CPP32 beta , a mammalian homolog of CED-3 , is a CrmA-inhibitable protease that cleaves the death substrate poly ( ADP-ribose ) polymerase .
Cell 1995 ; 81:801-9 .
[ 94 ] Nicholson DW , Ali A , Thornberry NA , et al .
Identification and inhibition of the ICE/CED-3 protease necessary for mammalian apoptosis [ see comments ] .
Nature 1995 ; 876:37-43 .
[ 95 ] Lennon G , Auffray C , Polymeropoulos M , Soares MB .
The L.M.A.G.E .
Consortium : an integrated molecular analysis of genomes and their expression .
Genomics 1996 ; 88:151-2 .
[ 96 ] Zhong X , Schneider TJ , Donohoe TJ , Rothstein TL .
A novel isoform of Fas Apoptosis Inhibitory Molecule ( FAIM ) -- cloning , genomic organization , alternative splicing and restricted expression .
Submitted 2000 ; [ 97 ] aimondi SC , Dube ID , Valentine MB , et al .
Clinicopathologic manifestations and breakpoints of the t 263 Inducible Fas-resistance in B cells ( 8 ; 5 ) in patients with acute nonlymphocytic leukemia .
Leukemia 1989 ; 8:42-7 .
[ 98 ] Dierlamm J , Rosenberg C , Stul M , et al .
Characteristic pattern of chromosomal gains and losses in marginal zone B cell lymphoma detected by comparative genomic hybridization .
Leukemia 1997 ; 11 : 747-58 .
[ 99 ] Petersen I , Bujard M , Petersen S , et al .
Patterns of chromosomal imbalances in adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the lung .
Cancer Res 1997 ; 57:2331-5 .
[ 100 ] Djerbi M , Screpanti V , Catrina AI , Bogen B , Biberfeld P , Grandien A .
The inhibitor of death receptor signaling , FLICE-inhibitory protein defines a new class of tumor progression factors [ see comments ] .
J Exp Med 1999 ; 190:1025-32 .
[ 101 ] Medema JP , de Jong J , van Hall T , Melief CJ , Offringa R. Immune escape of tumors in vivo by expression of cellular FLICE- inhibitory protein [ see comments ] .
J Exp Med 1999 ; 190:1033-8 .
[ 102 ] Balvay L , Libri D , Fiszman MY .
Pre-mRNA secondary structure and the regulation of splicing .
Bioessays 1993 ; 15:165-9 .
[ 103 ] Cavalier-Smith T. Intron phylogeny : a new hypothesis .
Trends Genet 1991 ; 7:145-8 .
[ 104 ] Palmer JD , Logsdon JM , Jr .
The recent origins of introns .
Curr Opin Genet Dev 1991 ; 1:470-7 .
[ 105 ] Lomedico P , Rosenthal N , Efstratidadis A , Gilbert W , Kolodner R , Tizard R. The structure and evolution of the two nonallelic rat preproinsulin genes .
Cell 1979 ; 18:545-58 .
[ 106 ] Li WH , Tanimura M , Luo CC , Datta S , Chan L. The apolipoprotein multigene family : biosynthesis , structure , structure-function relationships , and evolution .
J Lipid Res 1988 ; 29:245-71 .
[ 107 ] Frugoli JA , McPeek MA , Thomas TL , McClung CR .
Intron loss and gain during evolution of the catalase gene family in angiosperms .
Genetics 1998 ; 149:355-65 .
[ 108 ] Lane P , Traunecker A , Hubele S , Inui S , Lanzavecchia A , Gray D. Activated human T cells expre ss a ligand for the human B cell- associated antigen CD40 which participates in T cell- dependent activation of B lymphocytes .
Eur J Immunol 1992 ; 22:2573-8 .
[ 109 ] Noelle RJ , Roy M , Shepherd DM , Stamenkovie I , Ledbetter JA , Aruffo A .
A 39- kDa protein on activated helper T cells binds CD40 and transduces the signal for cognate activation of B cells .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992 ; 89:6550-4 .
[ 110 ] Armitage RJ , Fanslow WC , Strockbine L , et al .
Molecular and biological characterization of a murine ligand for CD40 .
Nature 1992 ; 357:80-2 .
[ 111 ] Ju ST , Panka DJ , Cui H , et al .
Fas ( CD95 ) /FasL interactions required for programmed cell death after T-cell activation [ see comments ] .
Nature 1995 ; 878:444-8 .
[ 112 ] Brunner T , Mogil RJ , LaFace D , et al .
Cell-autonomous Fas ( CD95 ) /Fas-ligand interaction mediates activation-induced apoptosis in T-cell hybridomas [ see comments ] .
Nature 1995 ; 878:441-4 .
[ 113 ] Dhein J , Walczak H , Baumler C , Debatin KM , Krammer PH .
Autocrine T-cell suicide mediated by APO-1/ ( Fas/CD95 ) [ see comments ] .
Nature 1995 ; 873:4838-41 .
[ 114 ] Alderson MR , Tough TW , Davis-Smith T , et al .
Fas ligand mediates activation-induced cell death in human T lymphocytes .
J Exp Med 1995 ; 181:71-7 .
[ 115 ] Ozdemirli M , El-Khatib M , Foote LC , et al .
Fas ( CD95 ) /Fas ligand interactions regulate antigen-specific , major histocompatibility complex-restricted T/B cell proliferative responses .
Eur J Immunol 1996 ; 26:415-9 .
[ 116 ] Wang JKM , Ju ST , Marshak-Rothstein A .
Protection of T cells from activation-induced cell death by Fas+ B cells .
Eur J Immunol 2000 ; in press .
[ 117 ] Shlomchik MJ , Marshak-Rothstein A , Wolfowiecz CB , Rothstein TL , Weigert MG .
The role of clonal selection and somatic mutation in autoimmunity .
Nature 1987 ; 828:805-11 .
[ 118 ] Wolfowicz CB , Sakorafas P , Rothstein TL , Marshak-Rothstein A. Oligoclonality of rheumatoid factors arising spontaneously in lor/ Ipr mice .
Clin Immunol Immunopathol 1988 ; 46:382-95 .
[ 119 ] Shlomchik M , Mascelli M , Shan H , et al .
Anti-DNA antibodies from autoimmune mice arise by clonal expansion and somatic mutation .
J Exp Med 1990 ; 171:265-92 .
[ 120 ] Rathmell JC , Cooke MP , Ho WY , et al .
CD95 ( Fas ) -dependent elimination of self-reactive B cells upon 264 Rothstein TL interaction with CD4+ T cells .
Nature 1995 ; 876:181-4 .
[ 121 ] Wang H , Shlomchik MJ .
Autoantigen-specific B cell activation in Fas-deficient rheumatoid factor immunoglobulin transgenic mice .
J Exp Med 1999 ; 190:639-49 .
[ 122 ] Cooke MP , Heath AW , Shokat KM , et al .
Immunoglobulin signal transduction guides the specificity of B cell-T cell interactions and is blocked in tolerant self-reactive B cells .
J Exp Med 1994 ; 179:425-38 .
[ 123 ] Eris JM , Basten A , Brink R , Doherty K , Kehry MR , Hodgkin PD .
Anergic self-reactive B cells present self antigen and respond normally to CD40-dependent T-cell signals but are defective in antigen-receptor-mediated functions .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994 ; 91:48392-6 .
[ 124 ] Ho WY , Cooke MP , Goodnow CC , Davis MM .
Resting and anergic B cells are defective in CD28-dependent costimulation of naive CD4+ T cells .
J Exp Med 1994 ; 179:1539-49 .
[ 125 ] Burstein HJ , Tepper RI , Leder P , Abbas AK .
Humoral immune functions in IL-4 transgenic mice .
J Immunol 1991 ; 147:2950-6 .
[ 126 ] Erb KJ , Ruger B , von Brevern M , Ryffel B , Schimpl A , Rivett K. Constitutive expression of interleukin ( IL ) -4 { \sl in vivo } causes autoimmune- type disorders in mice .
J Exp Med 1997 ; 185:329-39 .
[ 127 ] Rathmell JC , Fournier S , Weintraub BC , Allison JP , Goodnow CC .
Repression of B7.2 on self-reactive B cells is essential to prevent proliferation and allow Fas-mediated deletion by CD4 ( + ) T cells .
J Exp Med 1998 ; 188:651-9 .
[ 128 ] DiPiro JT , Howdieshell TR , Goddard JK , Callaway DB , Hamilton RG , Mansberger AR , Jr. Association of interleukin-4 plasma levels with traumatic injury and clinical course .
Arch Surg 1995 ; 180:1159-62 ; discussion 1162-3 .
[ 129 ] Klas C , Debatin KM , Jonker RR , Krammer PH .
Activation interferes with the APO-1 pathway in mature human T cells .
Int Immunol 1993 ; 5:625-30 .
[ 130 ] Refaeli Y , Van Parijs L , London CA , Tschopp J , Abbas AK .
Biochemical mechanisms of IL-2-regulated Fas-mediated T cell apoptosis .
Immunity 1998 ; 8:615-23 .
[ 131 ] Broome HE , Dargan CM , Krajewski S , Reed JC .
Expression of Bel-2 , Bel-x , and Bax after T cell activation and IL-2 withdrawal .
J Immunol 1995 ; 155:2311-7 .
[ 132 ] Peter ME , Kischkel FC , Scheuerpflug CG , Medema JP , Debatin KM , Krammer PH .
Resistance of cultured peripheral T cells towards activation-induced cell death involves a lack of recruitment of FLICE ( MACH/caspase 8 ) to the CD95 death-inducing signaling complex .
Eur J Immunol 1997 ; 27 : 1207-12 .
[ 133 ] Scaffidi C , Schmitz I , Krammer PH , Peter ME .
The role of c-FLIP in modulation of CD95-induced apoptosis .
J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274:1541-8 .
[ 134 ] Miethke T , Vabulas R , Bittlingmaier R , Heeg K , Wagner H. Mechanisms of peripheral T cell deletion : anergized T cells are Fas resistant but undergo proliferation-associated apoptosis .
Eur J Immunol 1996 ; 26:1459-67 .
[ 135 ] Boussiotis VA , Lee BJ , Freeman GJ , Gribben JG , Nadler LM .
Induction of T cell clonal anergy results in resistance , whereas CD28- mediated costimulation primes for susceptibility to Fas- and Bax-mediated programmed cell death .
J Immunol 1997 ; 159:3156-67 .
[ 136 ] Zhang X , Brunner T , Carter L , et al .
Unequal death in T helper cell ( Th ) 1 and Th2 effectors : Th1 , but not Th2 , effectors undergo rapid Fas/FasL-mediated apoptosis .
J Exp Med 1997 ; 185:1837-49 .
[ 137 ] Varadhachary AS , Perdow SN , Hu C , Ramanarayanan M , Salgame P. Differential ability of T cell subsets to undergo activation-induced cell death .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997 ; 94:5778-83 .
[ 138 ] Di Somma MM , Somma F , Montani MS , Mangiacasale R , Cundari E , Piccolella E. TCR engagement regulates differential responsiveness of human memory T cells to Fas ( CD95 ) -mediated apoptosis .
J Immunol 1999 ; 162:3851-8 .
[ 139 ] Inaba M , Kurasawa K , Mamura M , Kumano K , Saito Y , Iwamoto I. Primed T cells are more resistant to Fas-mediated activation-induced cell death than naive T cells .
J Immunol 1999 ; 163:1315-20 .
[ 140 ] Panayiotidis P , Ganeshaguru K , Foroni L , Hoffbrand AV .
Expression and function of the FAS antigen 265 Inducible Fas-resistance in B cells in B chronic lymphocytic leukemia and hairy cell leukemia .
Leukemia 1995 ; 9:1227-32 .
[ 141 ] Xerri L , Devilard E , Hassoun J , Haddad P , Birg F. Malignant and reactive cells from human lymphomas frequently express Fas ligand but display a different sensitivity to Fas-mediated apoptosis .
Leukemia 1997 ; 11:1868-77 .
[ 142 ] Plumas J , Jacob MC , Chaperot L , Molens JP , Sotto JJ , Bensa JC .
Tumor B cells from non-Hodgkin 's lymphoma are resistant to CD95 ( Fas/Apo-1 ) -mediated apoptosis .
Blood 1998 ; 91:2875-85 .
[ 143 ] Xerri L , Devilard E , Bouabdallah R , Stoppa AM , Hassoun J , Birg F. FADD expression and caspase activation in B-cell lymphomas resistant to Fas-mediated apoptosis .
Br J Haematol 1999 ; 106:652-61 .
[ 144 ] Owen-Schaub LB , Radinsky R , Kruzel E , Berry K , Yonehara S. Anti-Fas on nonhematopoietic tumors : levels of Fas/APO-1 and bel-2 are not predictive of biological responsiveness .
Cancer Res 1994 ; 54 : 1580-6 .
[ 145 ] Natoli G , Ianni A , Costanzo A , et al .
Resistance to Fas-mediated apoptosis in human hepatoma cells .
Oncogene 1995 ; 11:1157-64 .
[ 146 ] Keane MM , Ettenberg SA , Lowrey GA , Russell EK , Lipkowitz S. Fas expression and function in normal and malignant breast cell lines .
Cancer Res 1996 ; 56:4791-8 .
[ 147 ] Ungefroren H , Voss M , Jansen M , et al .
Human pancreatic adenocarcinomas express Fas and Fas ligand yet are resistant to Fas-mediated apoptosis .
Cancer Res 1998 ; 58:1741-9 .
[ 148 ] Hedlund TE , Duke RC , Schleicher MS , Miller GJ .
Fas-mediated apoptosis in seven human prostate cancer cell lines : correlation with tumor stage .
Prostate 1998 ; 36:92-101 .
[ 149 ] Baldwin RL , Tran H , Karlan BY .
Primary ovarian cancer cultures are resistant to Fas-mediated apoptosis .
Gynecol Oncol 1999 ; 74:265-71 .
[ 150 ] Peng SL , Robert ME , Hayday AC , Craft J .
A tumor-suppressor function for Fas ( CD95 ) revealed in T cell-deficient mice .
J Exp Med 1996 ; 184:1149-54 .
[ 151 ] Traver D , Akashi K , Weissman IL , Lagasse E. Mice defective in two apoptosis pathways in the myeloid lineage develop acute myeloblastic leukemia .
Immunity 1998 ; 9:47-57 .
[ 152 ] Davidson WF , Giese T , Fredrickson TN .
Spontaneous development of plasmacytoid tumors in mice with defective Fas-Fas ligand interactions .
J Exp Med 1998 ; 187:1825-38 .
[ 153 ] Owen-Schaub LB , van Golen KL , Hill LL , Price JE .
Fas and Fas ligand interactions suppress melanoma lung metastasis .
J Exp Med 1998 ; 188:1717-23 .
[ 154 ] Furman RR , Asgary Z , Mascarenhas JO , Liou HC , Schattner EJ .
Modulation of NF- ® B activity and apoptosis in chronic lymphocytic leukemia B cells .
J Immunol 2000 ; 164:2200-6 .
[ 155 ] Ugurel S , Seiter S , Rappl G , Stark A , Tilgen W , Reinhold U. Heterogenous susceptibility to CD95-induced apoptosis in melanoma cells correlates with bel-2 and bel-x expression and is sensitive to modulation by interferon- v. Int J Cancer 1999 ; 82:727-36 .
266
