From www .
bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
HEMATOPOIESIS Positive and negative regulation of granulopoiesis by endogenous RARa Philippe Kastner , H. Jeffrey Lawrence , Caroline Waltzinger , Norbert B. Ghyselinck , Pierre Chambon , and Susan Chan Acute promyelocytic leukemia ( APL ) is always associated with chromosomal translocations that disrupt the retinoic acid receptor a ( RAR « ) gene .
Whether these translocations relate to a role for endogenous RAR « in normal granulopoiesis remains uncertain because most studies addressing this question have used non-physiological overexpression systems .
Granulocyte differentiation in cells derived from RARa « -deficient ( RARa « ~~- ) mice was studied and evaluated in the context of agonist-bound and ligand-free RAR « .
Our results demonstrate that RARe « is dispensable for granulopoiesis , as RAR & « ~~- mice have a normal granulocyte population despite an impaired ability to respond to retinoids .
However , although it is not absolutely required , RARa « can bidirectionally modulate granulopoiesis .
RAR « stimulates differentiation in response to exogenous retinoic acid .
Furthermore , endogenous retinoids control granulopoiesis in vivo , as either vitamin A-deficient mice or animals treated with an RAR antagonist accumulate more immature granulocytes in their bone marrow .
Conversely , RAR « acts to limit differentiation in the absence of ligand because granulocyte precursors from RARa « ~~- mice differentiate earlier in culture .
Thus , the block in granulopoiesis exerted by RARa « fusion proteins expressed in APL cells may correspond to an amplification of a normal function of unliganded RAR « .
( Blood .
2001 ; 97 : 1314-1320 ) ©2001 by The American Society of Hematology Introduction The retinoic acid receptor « ( RARa ) gene is altered by chromosomal translocations in all cases of acute promyelocytic leukemia ( APL ) .
These translocations lead to the synthesis of chimeric proteins , resulting from the fusion of novel N-terminal sequences to RARa amino acids 60-4623 To date , 5 distinct fusion partners for RARa have been identified , all of which belong to distinct protein families .
PML , the most frequent partner , is a nuclear protein containing a RING finger and a coiled coil .
PML has been implicated in regulating the formation and function of nuclear bodies , nuclear substructures whose function is not completely understood .
Less frequent partners include PLZF ( a zinc finger transcription factor ) , `` NuMA ( a mitotic apparatus protein ) , nucleophosmin , ' and STAT5b.° Forced expression of either PML/ RARa or PLZF/RARa induces an APL-like disease in transgenic mice and establishes the causal role of these fusion proteins in APL leukemogenesis . ``
At the molecular level , both PML/RARa and PLZE/RARa are strong repressors , efficiently recruiting a complex containing the nuclear receptor corepressors N-CoR/SMRT and histone deacetylase to target promoters . ``
Importantly , these repressive properties appear to be closely linked with their leukemogenic potential , as histone deacetylase inhibitors can reverse the leukemic phenotype and lead to remission in transgenic mouse models of APL .
Despite accumulating data implicating the fusion proteins in leuke-mia , relatively little is known about how their action relates to a normal function of RARa during granulopoiesis , the process by which immature myeloid cells , such as promyelocytes , differentiate to mature neutrophils .
In the hematopoietic system , RARa is expressed at significant levels in granulocytes , indicating a possible function within this lineage .
'¢ `` 8 RA has been shown to act as a differentiating agent for both normal and transformed immature myeloid cells , `` `` suggesting that the fusion proteins might antagonize normal RA-dependent differentiation .
Conversely , overexpression of wild type ( WT ) RARa ( as well as dominant negative forms of this receptor ) has also been shown to block promyelocyte differentiation in culture . ``
'' Thus , at limiting RA concen-trations , an increase in the proportion of unliganded RAR molecules may lead to a dominant-negative inhibition of RA-controlled differentiation .
Lastly , RA appears to orient the differentiation of pluripotent hematopoietic progenitors toward the granulocyte lineage , indicating that RA may be involved in granulocyte fate specification . ``
These various studies , however , which employ either overexpressed receptors or exogenous ligands , fall short of demonstrating a physiological role for endogenous RARa in granulopoiesis .
By studying cells derived from RARa-deficient mice , we demonstrate here that RARa is a bidirectional modulator of granulocyte differentiation : In the absence of RA , RARa acts to limit granulocyte differentiation ; in the presence of RA , RARa stimulates differentiation .
Materials and methods Mice RARa- and RARy-deficient mice were described previously . ``
Mice were genotyped by polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) ( primers available upon request ) .
All mice used in this study were between 2 and 6 months of age .
Vitamin A deficiency ( VAD ) in cellular retinol-binding protein type I ( CRBPI ) `` ~ mice was produced by maintaining CRBPI '~ mice ( all males ) From the Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire , !
llkirch , France .
Submitted August 24 , 2000 ; accepted November 2 , 2000 .
Supported by grants from the Association pour la Recherche sur le Cancers ; the Centre National pour la Recherche Scientifique ; the Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale ; the Hopital Universitaire de Strasbourg ; the College de France , llikirch Cedex , France ; and Bristol-Myers Squibb , Princeton , NJ .
H.J.L.. is the recipient of a VA Career Development Award .
BMS493 was provided by Bristol-Myers Squibb .
1314 Reprints : Philippe Kastner and Susan Chan , Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire , CNRS-INSERM-ULP-College de France , BP163 , 67404 lllkirch Cedex , France ; e-mail : scpk @ igbmc.u-strasbg fr .
The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge payment .
Therefore , and solely to indicate this fact , this article is hereby marked `` advertisement `` in accordance with 18 U.S.C .
section 1734 .
©2001 by The American Society of Hematology BLOOD , 1 MARCH 2001 « VOLUME 97 , NUMBER 5 From www .
bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
BLOOD , 1 MARCH 2001 » VOLUME 97 , NUMBER 5 RARB « & HPRT ® @ # a » @ Figure 1 .
RARs are dispensable for granulopoiesis .
( A ) Fluorescence-activated cell sorter ( FACS ) profile of WT and RAR « ~~RARy~'~ double mutant E14.5 FL cells stained for GR-1 and Mac-1 expression .
( B ) RT-PCR analysis of granulocyte marker expression in E14.5 FL from WT or ~ mice .
( C ) May-Grinwald Giemsa staining of cells from granulocyte-macrophage colonies derived from E14.5 WT and RAR « ~~RARy ~~ FL cells showing morphologically normal neutrophils and macrophages .
( D ) Absence of RARB expression in FL or pooled colonies ( C ) derived from WT or RARe~~RARy ~ mutants .
cDNA from E8.5 embryos ( E ) was used as a positive control .
on a VAD diet for at least 16 weeks after birth . ``
'' VAD was confirmed by the observation of several VAD-related phenotypes : keratinization of the seminal vesicle and prostate epithelia , testis degeneration , and retinal defects . ``
These symptoms were specifically observed in CRBPI~- mice fed a VAD diet , not in control mice ( ie , WT mice fed a VAD diet or CRBPI~~ mice fed a normal diet ) .
All-trans-retinoic acid ( ATRA ) ( Sigma Chemical Co , St Louis , MO ) and the pan-RAR antagonist BMS493 were dissolved in ethanol and then placed in an emulsion with corn oil by vigorous vortexing .
The emulsion was administered to test animals by gavage every 12 hours ( BMS493 ) or every 36 hours ( ATRA ) for 3 days .
Bone marrow ( BM ) cells were harvested by flushing femurs with medium .
Fetal liver ( FL ) cell suspensions were prepared by sequential passage of dissected FLs through 18- , 22- , and 25-gauge needles .
Cell culture Liquid myeloid cultures were performed by seeding 2 X 10° BM cells in 10 mL Iscoves modified Dulbecco medium supplemented with 20 % fetal bovine serum ( Gibco-BRL Life Technologies , Grand Island , NJ ) , 5 ng/mL granulocyte colony-stimulating factor ( G-CSF ) , and 5 ng/mL stem cell factor ( SCF ) ( R & D Systems , Minneapolis , MN ) , penicillin/streptomycin , and L-glutamine ( 2 mM final concentration ) .
Ligands were added in 10 pL volumes from a 10-3 M solution in ethanol .
Labeling with 5- and 6-carboxy fluorescein diacetate , succinimidyl ester ( CFSE ) ( Molecular Probes , Eu-gene , OR ) was performed by incubating BM cells for 10 minutes at 37°C at a concentration of 10 `` cells per mL in medium supplemented with 2 uL/mL E ) B wr control ‘ RARa~/~ # « L % `` s. x .
= ho Jk colony number ( per 51104 bone marrow cati ; 9CRA , - _+ = + WT _ RARa~ !
~ Figure 2 .
RAR « ~~ myeloid progenitors are resistant to the inhibitory effects of 9C-RA .
( A ) Numbers of colonies developing from 5 x 10+ BM cells from WT or RARa~~ mice in the presence or absence of 10~® M 9C-RA .
Each bar represents the average of duplicate samples from 3 mice .
The cytokines used to stimulate growth of hematopoietic progenitors were SCF , IL-6 , IL-3 , and EPO .
( B ) Representative colonies ( day 7 ) showing the reduction in size of WT granulocyte colonies grown in the presence of 9C-RA and the lack of such an effect in RARe~~ mutants .
RARa MODULATES GRANULOPOIESIS - 1315 GR-1 BMS493 9C-RA ane | q s - 47.6 WT J immature cells ( gate B ) ture cells % 7 52.9 53.8 54.1 ma ara 46.2 || _ 459 ( gate C ) RARa~/- ] I ‘ I BMS493 - 9C-RA Figure 3 .
Accelerated differentiation of RAR & « ~~ granulocytes in liquid cultures stimulated with G-CSF and SCF .
Cultures of CFSE-labeled BM cells were harvested 3 days after their initiation and stained for Mac-1 and GR-1 expression .
The RAR antagonist BMS493 or the RXR/RAR agonist 9C-RA was added at the onset of the culture at a final concentration of 10-° M , where indicated .
( A ) The analysis was limited to CFSE `` cells , which correspond to cells that have arisen during the culture from proliferation of immature granulocytes .
Note that CFSENish cells correspond exclusively to mature granulocytes with a Mac-1 `` ° `` GR-1 `` * `` phenotype ( data not shown ) .
( B ) Representative GR-1/Mac-1 profiles of CFSE `` cells .
Note the shift toward the more immature phenotype in the BMS493-treated WT sample and the similarity of the phenotypes of all RAR « ~~ samples with that of the 9C-RA-treated WT sample .
( C ) Quantification in percent of all cells present in gates B and C of immature ( gate B in panel A ) and mature ( gate C in panel A ) cells from the experiment displayed in panel B .
The experiment described in this figure was performed in duplicate for each of the 2 WT and 2 RARe~~ mice .
For a given set of culture conditions and mouse genotype , variations in the percentage of the gated populations were within 1.5 % of those indicated .
control of a 10 mg/mL CFSE solution in dimethyl sulfoxide followed by 2 washes with 10 mL medium .
Clonogenic cultures were performed with commercial methylcellulose media ( Methocult 3434 ; Stem Cell Technologies , Vancou-ver , BC , Canada ) .
The media contained erythropoietin ( EPO ) , interleukin-3 ( IL-3 ) , IL-6 , and SCF for the experiments described in Figure 1C and Figure 2 , and the media contained Methocult 3234 supplemented with granulocyte-macrophage ( GM ) -CSF ( R & D Systems ) at a final concentration of 50 ng/mL for the experiments described in Figure 4 .
Antibodies and flow cytometry The following antibodies were used : fluorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) -labeled GR-1 ( Caltag , South San Francisco , CA ) or phycoerythrin-labeled GR-1 ( Pharmingen , San Diego , CA ) and biotin-labeled Mac-1 ( CD11b , Pharmingen ) .
Streptavidin-Cy5 was purchased from Jackson Immunore-search Laboratories , West Grove , PA. Antibody stainings were performed From www .
bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
1316 _ KASTNER etal 4 IK promyelocytes myelocytes/metamyelocytes [ ] neutrophils day 5 50 30 20 10 0 owt @ y CCI & & `` $ ¢ & 8 , ® T Hts a §§ [ < a & se ?
@ 1,3 ; t ; & oC 0 a* day 8 < % + % f f , * : ’ `` \ C in f & t K es & .
K A a ' * a 4 ~ * ® 4 * .
on 105 BM or FL cells and analyzed ( Coulter Elite cytometer ; Coulter Electronics , Hialeah , FL ) .
Listmode data were collected on 3 X 10+ cells .
Reverse transcriptase-PCR Reverse transcriptase ( RT ) -PCR reactions were performed on 50 ng complementary DNA ( cDNA ) using the following oligonucleotides : cathepsin G : 5-GATTGTAATCAGGATGGCGG-3 ' , 5'-CTGACTAAG-CAACGGTTCTGG-3 ' ; myeloperoxidase : 5'-ATGCAGTGGGGA-CAGTTTCTG-3 ' , 5-GTCGTTGTAGGATCGGTACTG-3 ' ; elastase : 5'-CACCATCAGTCAGGTCTTCC-3 ' , 5'-AGTCTCCGAAGCATATGCC-3 ' ; B-actin : 5-GTGACGAGGCCCAGAGCAAGAG-3 ' , 5-AGGGGC-CGGACTCATCGTACTC-3 ' ; RARB : 5'-CTCGTCCCGAGCCCACCA-TCTCCACTT-3 ' , 5 -GAGGTCGTCTAGCTCCGCTGTCATCTC-3 ' ; and hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase ( HPRT ) : 5'-GTAATGATCAGT-CAACG-3 ' , 5-CCAGCAAGCTTGCAACCTTAACCA-3 ' .
RARRB and HPRT amplification products ( Figure 1D ) were detected after Southern blot analysis and hybridization with phosphorous 32 ( *P ) -labeled oligonucleotide probes ( 5'-CCATAGTGGTAGCC-3 ' and 5-CACTGG-TAAAACAATGCAAA-3 ' , respectively ) .
Results RARs are dispensable for granulopoiesis Granulocyte populations appeared normal in RARa « ~'~ mice at the level of blood neutrophil counts ( data not shown ) and in the BM ( GR-1*Mac-1* population ; Figure 5C , upper right panel , and data not shown ) .
To investigate whether functional compensation by other RARs occurs in RARa « ~'~ mutants , we examined RARa~-RARy~'~- double mutants , as RARy is also expressed in granulocytes . ``
Because RARa~-RARy~~- mutants die in utero , `` `` granulopoiesis was studied in the FL .
Granulocytes BLOOD , 1 MARCH 2001 « VOLUME 97 , NUMBER 5 Figure 4 .
Accelerated differentiation of granulocytes in GM-CSF-dependent clonogenic cul-tures .
We plated 5 x 10 % BM cells in methylcellulose | medium containing 50 ng/mL GM-CSF .
( A-D ) Pooled cells from all the colonies developing on a dish ( about 70 colonies ) were cytocentrifuged onto a glass slide and stained with May-Grinwald-Giemsa .
Arrowheads in panel A indicate promyelocytes that are numerous on slides - from day-5 WT cultures , but are less frequent in mutant samples .
The inset in panels A and B corresponds to the scoring of approximately 400 cells of the granulocyte lineage for each case .
( E , F ) Typical colonies from culture dishes at day 8 ; note the reduction in the number and size of dense cellular aggregates ( arrows ) } , which correspond to granulocytes .
developed normally in RARa « ~-RARy~~- E14.5 FLs as tested by several criteria : double-mutant myeloid cells exhibited a normal GR-1+*Mac-1* phenotype ( Figure 1A ) ; differentiated cells ( containing ring-shaped or segmented nuclei ) were detected at similar frequencies on cytospin preparations from mutant and WT FLs ( data not shown ) ; granulocyte-specific markers were expressed at similar levels ( Figure 1B ) ; and morphologically normal neutrophils were generated in myeloid colonies in vitro ( Figure 1C ) .
Because RARBG expression was not detected in freshly isolated or cultured FL cells ( Figure 1D ) , granulopoiesis can thus proceed efficiently in the absence of any RAR .
To determine whether granulocyte progenitors from RARa~ ' mice could still respond to retinoids , we compared the response of WT and RARa~~- BM cells to 9-cis retinoic acid ( IC-RA , a pan-RAR and pan-RXR [ retinoid X receptor ] agonist ) in a myeloid colony-forming assay .
As previously reported , `` `` the total number of colonies developing from WT BM cells , as well as the size of pure granulocyte colonies , were markedly reduced in the presence of 9C-RA ( Figure 2A , B ) .
Neither of these effects were observed in cultures of RARa~ `` ~ BM cells ( Figure 2 ) ( P < .01 ) , indicating that RARa~'~ granulocyte progenitors are impaired in their response to retinoids .
These results , together with the apparent normal granulopoiesis in RARa « ~-RARy~~- mutants , demonstrate that RARs and retinoids are dispensable for granulopoiesis .
Accelerated granulocyte differentiation in the absence of RARe « Although the RA/RAR pathway is not required , it can clearly modulate granulocyte differentiation , as shown by the response of WT cells to retinoids .
Consequently , we analyzed the effects of RAR agonists and antagonists on granulocyte differentiation in From www .
bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
BLOOD , 1 MARCH 2001 » VOLUME 97 , NUMBER 5 B CRapi+/+ chapi~- `` _ VAD diet ' !
Control diet VAD diet ' p- r ars % Figure 5 .
Effect of retinoid excess and VAD on granulopoiesis in vivo .
BM granulocyte populations were analyzed by flow cytometry with the Mac-1 and GR-1 markers .
Granulocyte differentiation proceeds along a curve-shaped path in which increasing levels of Mac-1 and GR-1 are acquired as the cells mature .
Thus , Mac-1°®~GR-1°* cells correspond mainly to promyelocytes , myelocytes , and metamyelocytes , whereas Mac-1*GR-1 `` * `` cells correspond mainly to band and segmented neutrophils® ( data not shown ) .
( A ) WT mice were treated for 3 days with 10 mg/kg BMS493 or vehicle .
In the right panels the GR-1 profile of the granulocyte population ( Mac-1* cells , gated in the left panels ) is shown , and the percentage of GR-1 `` * immature granulocytes within that population is indicated .
( B ) Granulocyte populations in VAD mice .
Note the overall increase of the granulocyte population { gated in the top panels ) and the increase , within that population , of the immature granulocyte population ( GR-1 `` ** cells , bottom panels ) that occurs specifically in the VAD mice ( ie , CRBPI~'~ mice fed a VAD diet ) .
( C ) Effect of ATRA administration .
Mice were treated with 100 mg/kg ATRA or vehicle for 72 hours .
Note the shift to the right of GR-1 expression within the immature granulocyte population ( gated ) in AT RA-treated WT mice , producing a comet-like profile , which is not seen in the ATRA-treated RARa~~ mice .
Note that a reduction in the number of the mature ( GR-1 `` % `` ) BM granulocytes was also observed in ATRA-treated WT mice , which probably reflects an enhanced efflux of neutrophils from the BM , as peripheral blood neutrophil numbers were increased 1.5- to 3-fold ( data not shown ) .
liquid cultures of WT BM cells stimulated with G-CSF and SCF .
To monitor cells that had undergone division during the culture period , freshly isolated BM cells were cytoplasmically labeled with the vital dye CFSE ( a fluorescent compound that is gradually diluted upon cell division ) prior to culture , and analysis was confined to CFSE-** cells ( Figure 3A ) .
Increased levels of GR-1 and Mac-1 expression were used to measure differentiation . ``
'' 9C-RA induced an increase in the proportion of de novo GR-1 `` ® `` cells in cultures of WT cells ( Figure 3B , upper right panel , gate C , and Figure 3C ) as well as a decrease in the proportion of CFSE cells ( data not shown ) , which is consistent with the premise that RA limits the proliferation of granulocyte precursors and induces their differentiation .
In contrast , the pan-RAR antagonist BMS493 ( H. Gronemeyer and PC .
, unpublished observation , February 1996 ) induced an increase in the proportion of immature granulocytes ( Figure 3B , upper middle panel , gate B , and Figure 3C ) , a finding corroborated by the higher frequency of promyelocytes/myelocytes on cytospin preparations from these cultures ( data not shown ) .
Interestingly , the magnitude of the response to BMS493 greatly exceeded that to 9C-RA , suggesting that retinoids in the serum might play an important part in controlling the differentiation that occurs in the absence of exogenous ligands .
When RARa~'~ BM cells were grown under identical culture conditions , the ratio of immature RARa MODULATES GRANULOPOIESIS - 1317 versus mature cells generated was unaffected by treatment with either IC-RA or BMS493 ( Figure 3B , C ) , confirming the resistance of RARa « ~- granulocytes to the effects of RAR ligands .
In addition , the proportions of mature cells were consistently increased when compared with WT samples in the control and BMS493-treated cultures to levels usually observed in 9C-RA-treated WT cultures ( Figure 3B , C ) .
Thus granulocyte differentiation appears to be accelerated in the absence of RARa .
This apparent acceleration of maturation was also seen in clonogenic methylcellulose cultures stimulated with GM-CSF ( Figure 4 ) .
After 5 days of culture , granulocytes from pooled RARa~ `` ~ colonies were more mature than those from WT colonies ( compare Figure 4A with B and inset ) .
By day 8 , there was a marked underrepresentation of granulocytes in the mutant cultures , which now consisted mainly of macrophages ( Figure 4C , D ) , suggesting that the prematurely differentiated neutrophils seen on day 5 of culture had died off over time .
At the colony level , dense granulocyte clusters were less abundant and smaller in RARa~'~-cultures after 8 days ( Figure 4E , F ) , a phenotype that reliably allowed for the blind separation of dishes containing WT or RARa~~ cells .
It is noteworthy that both types of experimental cultures used different cytokines ( G-CSF and SCF for the liquid cultures and GM-CSF for the methylcellulose cultures ) , thus excluding a cytokine-specific effect .
These observations provide evidence that lack of RARa relieves a physiological restraint on granulocyte differentiation normally exerted by this receptor in the absence of ligand .
Retinoids control granulopoiesis in vivo To understand how retinoids may modulate granulopoiesis in vivo , we evaluated granulocyte differentiation in WT mice treated with BMS493 .
Of 11 treated WT mice , 7 mice exhibited a clear increase in the proportion of immature granulocytes in the BM ( Mac-1 !
°+GR-1- `` °* , Figure 5A ) .
As this increase was not seen in vehicle-treated or untreated animals , its occurrence in BMS493-treated mice most likely reflects a role for endogenous retinoids in regulating granulocyte differentiation .
To investigate further , we analyzed VAD mice using CRBPI-deficient mice that , owing to low vitamin A stores , become readily VAD when starved for vitamin A . ``
'' In all VAD CRBPI -- mice tested ( n = 6 ) , there was a marked expansion in the size of the entire granulocyte population ( Figure 5B , upper right panel ) when compared with control animals ( ie , CRBPI~'- mice on a normal diet or CRBPI+*'* mice on a VAD diet ) as well as an increase in the proportion of immature Mac-1'°*+GR-1-/°w cells ( Figure 5B , lower right panel ) .
This effect was accompanied by an increase of neutrophils in the spleen and blood ( data not shown ) , which is consistent with a previous report showing enhanced neutrophil numbers in VAD rats . ``
Importantly , the VAD-induced increase in the immature granulocyte compartment of the BM mirrors that seen following BMS493 administration ( Figure 5A ) , underscoring a role for endogenous retinoids in the positive control of granulopoiesis in vivo .
In contrast , ATRA treatment of WT mice ( n = 7 ) elicited an increase in the levels of GR-1 and Mac-1 expressed by the Mac-1°*~*GR-1~ `` ** immature granulocyte population ( Figure 5C , gated region , compare upper and lower left panels ) , an effect that did not occur in RARa~~ mice ( n = 4 ) ( Figure 5C , right panels ) .
This indicates that RARa is the direct mediator of exogenous ( and , by inference , endogenous ) retinoid-induced differentiation .
Signifi-cantly , the fact that all 7 ATRA-treated WT mice responded in a similar manner also suggests that under normal dietary conditions , From www .
bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
1318 - KASTNER etal RARa proteins are not fully liganded in vivo , thus placing them in an appropriate state to negatively regulate differentiation .
Discussion RARa « : a bidirectional modulator of granulopoiesis We have shown here that ( 1 ) endogenous RARa « is a key mediator of the effects of retinoids on granulopoiesis , and ( 2 ) the RARa receptor can bidirectionally modulate granulopoiesis as a differentiation factor when liganded to RA or as an inhibitor in the absence of ligand ( or when liganded to an antagonist ) , probably by acting as a transcriptional repressor .
`` > > The fact that RA is a differentiating agent for granulocytes in culture has been well established for both normal and leukemic However , the role of retinoids during normal granulocyte differentiation in vivo has so far not been documented .
The increase in the immature granulocyte populations , seen both in the VAD and BMS493-treated mice here , show for the first time that retinoid-controlled differentiation actively contributes to the regulation of granulocyte numbers in vivo .
Our VAD results are in agreement with those of Kuwata et al , `` `` who recently reported a collective increase in granulocyte numbers during murine VAD as well as with an earlier report documenting elevated neutrophils in the peripheral blood of VAD rats . ``
Although Kuwata et al `` `` did not study the relative contributions of immature versus mature cells in their granulocyte population , their VAD mice also seemed to accumulate more cells with a GR-1'°* phenotype , as seen in the Kuwata et al Figure 3A , `` `` and may therefore exhibit a phenotype similar to that of our VAD mice .
We have noted that optimal resolution of the GR-1'** and populations appears to depend on the fluorochrome to which the anti-GR-1 antibody is conjugated ; FITC-conjugated anti-GR-1 ( as used in our study ) provided the best resolution , while other conjugated forms of this antibody appeared to give more compact stainings similar to those shown by Kuwata et al . ``
'' These authors also found less apoptosis within the granulocyte population of their VAD mice , an observation that they used to explain their increase in granulocyte numbers .
Although we can not exclude that retinoids directly regulate cell survival , it is possible that the decrease in apoptosis seen by Kuwata and colleagues is an indirect consequence of a shift toward the more immature stages because apoptosis is the ultimate endpoint of differentiation .
The finding that endogenous unliganded RARa negatively regulates differentiation is consistent with results from previous studies showing that overexpression of WT RARa blocks promyelocyte differentiation in vitro .
`` > `` `` However , the non-physiological levels of receptor expressed in these systems have prevented any clear conclusion about the role of the endogenous molecule .
In fact , these latter studies often claimed that the overexpressed receptors functioned in a dominant-negative manner by titrating out retinoids present in the medium , thereby countering the differentiating role of these compounds .
Our present results suggest otherwise ; the differentiation block exerted by overexpressed RARa corresponds to an amplification of an intrinsic inhibitory activity of the unliganded receptor .
It is important to stress that in contrast to the overexpression studies , blocking the activation of the endogenous receptor in vivo or in vitro ( with VAD or BMS493 ) never resulted in a complete arrest in differentiation such as the arrest achieved by overexpressed receptors , thereby reflecting the possibility that RARa is expressed in limiting amounts .
Intriguingly , our results appear to contradict those of Labrecque et al , ' `` who reported that granulocytes from myeloid BLOOD , 1 MARCH 2001 « VOLUME 97 , NUMBER 5 colonies derived from RARa1~-RARy~'~ neonatal BM cells tend to be more immature than those derived from WT cells ( RARa1 being one of the 2 major isoforms produced from the RARa gene ) . ``
As we never observed such a block in colonies derived from RARa~-RARy~~- FL cells , the apparent difference in the behavior of the RARa1~-RARy~'~- cells might be due to the persistent expression of RARa2 , an isoform not present in our double mutants .
It should be noted that we used FL cells in our study , while Labrecque and colleagues ' `` used BM cells .
However , we observed a similar premature differentiation in GM-CSF-dependent colonies derived from either FL or adult BM RARa « ~'~ cells ( unpublished observations , February 1998 ) .
Thus , it appears unlikely that RARs control granulopoiesis differently in FL and BM cells .
With respect to RARy , its role appears to be minor at best , as cells lacking only RARa are already resistant to the effects of retinoids .
The present results demonstrate that granulocyte differentiation can proceed in the absence of RARs .
The RA/RARa pathway is therefore not an obligatory regulator of granulopoiesis , but rather a modulator of this differentiation .
Both retinoid excess and deficiency affect granulopoiesis , suggesting that a balance between liganded and unliganded receptor molecules exists in vivo under normal conditions .
The question therefore arises as to which physiological or pathological conditions modulate retinoid levels .
Dietary VAD , a condition that is associated with higher susceptibility to bacterial infections , is an obvious candidate .
The negative regulation of granulopoiesis by unliganded RARa « ( which ultimately translates into an elevated granulocyte pool ) might thus represent an innate response used to off-set VAD-associated infections .
In this view , an important role of RARa « during granulopoiesis could paradoxically be to mediate the effect of ligand deficiency .
Analysis of the VAD response in RARa~'- mice should help to clarify this issue .
At the molecular level , several downstream candidates might mediate the actions of RARa .
A prime candidate is C-EBPe , an RA-target gene induced by RA in myeloid cell lines** > `` and shown to be essential for terminal granulocyte differentiation . ``
However , because granulocytes can fully differentiate in the absence of RARs or during retinoid deficiency , it is unlikely that retinoids are the only regulators of C-EBPe expression in vivo .
In this respect we have found that overall , C-EBPe transcript levels were not altered in the BM of RARa~~- mice ( unpublished data , March 1998 ) .
Other interesting candidates are the cdk inhibitors p21 and p27 , whose increases have been shown to be associated with the transition between immature , proliferating cells and post-mitotic differentiated cells for several cell types including myeloid cells.44 > Interestingly , p21 has been proposed to be a target gene for nuclear receptors , RARs included.4 `` `` `` How these proteins are regulated in cells lacking RARa thus merits further investigation .
Hox genes , which are regulated by retinoic acid in the embryo , might also contribute to mediating RAR function during hematopoiesis `` ; their precise role during granulopoiesis , however , and their possible regulation by RARs remain unknown .
Finally , Mad1 has been shown to positively regulate cell cycle exit during granulopoiesis , possibly by antagonizing the effects of mye proteins . ``
'' Whether the Myc/Mad and the RAR pathways are parallel or convergent modulators of granulopoiesis remains to be seen .
The role of retinoid signaling during hematopoiesis is likely to extend beyond its role of regulating granulocyte differentiation described here .
RA has also been suggested to act as a commitment factor for the granulocyte lineage , as exogenous RA is able to From www .
bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
BLOOD , 1 MARCH 2001 » VOLUME 97 , NUMBER 5 redirect erythroid- , monocyte , or eosinophil-committed progenitors toward a granulocyte fate .
`` * `` `` Although our study does not directly address this issue , it is clear that other factors besides RA can influence granulocyte lineage commitment , as commitment was not impaired in RARa « ~-RARy~'~- double mutants or upon VAD .
However , the proportion of granulocytes was often reduced in myeloid colonies derived from RARa « ~~- BM cells , and the frequency of granulocyte-only colonies was diminished ( unpublished data , October 1998 ) , phenotypes that could indicate defective granulocyte commitment in the mutants .
The present effects of RAR agonists and antagonists during terminal granulocyte differentiation also contrast with those observed when similar compounds were used on hematopoietic stem cells , where RAR agonists and antagonists antagonized and promoted their differentiation , respec-tively . ``
'' These differences suggest a complex pattern of retinoid receptor function during hematopoiesis .
Implications for APL pathogenesis RARa chromosomal rearrangements represent the genetic hallmark of APL .
The tight association between RARa alterations and APL strongly suggests that a normal RARa-dependent function must be altered to transform promyelocytes .
Generally , it has been assumed that the APL RARa fusion proteins act as dominant-negative inhibitors of retinoid-dependent differentiation . ``
'' `` However , because granulocyte differentiation is only partially blocked when retinoid signaling through RAR is prevented , dominant-negative inhibition of retinoid-induced differentiation can not account for the complete differentiation block seen in APL cells .
Our data suggest an alternative mechanism of action for the RAR fusion proteins : enhancement of the normal inhibitory function of unliganded RARa .
This enhancement may be due to an overexpression of the fusion proteins vis-a-vis WT RARa , as is often observed in APL cells , `` `` and/or to the more potent repressive properties of the References RARa MODULATES GRANULOPOIESIS - 1319 fusion proteins themselves .
In this respect , PML-RARa and PLZF-RARa are powerful transcriptional repressors that efficiently recruit histone deacetylases to target promoters . ``
Interestingly , overexpression of thyroid hormone receptor « ( TRa ) in erythroid precursors blocks their differentiation , `` suggesting that the differentiation arrest mediated by v-erbA , the oncogenic form of TRa , during erythropoiesis might also correspond to an enhancement of a normal property of TRa .
Different nuclear receptors may therefore control differentiation and leukemogenesis in distinct hematopoietic lineages via similar mechanisms .
If interference with RARao-regulated differentiation appears important for APL pathogenesis , it probably represents only one facet of the action of RARa fusion proteins in APL .
Fusion of RARa with PML or PLZF has been shown to be required to provoke APL .
Dominant interference with other functions , such as those of PML ( a tumor suppressor gene that controls apoptosis and p53 acetylation ) , is likely to be important . ``
In this respect the coiled coil moiety of PML appears to mediate the formation of high molecular weight oligomeric complexes containing both PML-RARa « and PML , complexes which could disrupt normal PML function . ``
'' Simultaneous targeting of several cellular functions by the RARa fusion proteins might therefore cooperate to transform promyelocytes .
Acknowledgments We thank P. Reczek ( Bristol-Myers Squibb , Princeton , NJ ) for providing BMS493 and M. Sporn for C. Bronn , B. Bondeau , and B. Feret for excellent technical assistance ; C. Ebel for help with flow cytometry ; and A. Pailleux , F. Fischer , and P. Michel for maintaining the mice .
.. Melnick A , Licht JD .
Deconstructing a disease : RARalpha , its fusion partners , and their roles in the pathogenesis of acute promyelocytic leuke- partner of retinoic acid receptor alpha in acute promyelocytic-like leukaemia .
Hum Mol Genet .
1999 ; 8:1741-1749. .
He LZ , Guidez F , Tribioli C , et al .
Distinct interac- tions of PML-RARalpha and PLZF-RARalpha with co-repressors determine differential re S , Zelent A .
Reduced retinoic acid-sensitivities of nuclear receptor corepressor binding to PML- and PLZF-RARalpha underlie molecular pathogene- sis and treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia .
Blood .
1998 ; 91:2634-2642. h `` 16 .
ZelentA , Zhu J , Lanotte M , et al .
Differential ex-mia .
Blood .
1999 ; 93:3167-3215. sponses to RA in APL .
Nat Genet .
1998 ; 18:126- pression of retinoid receptors during multilineage .
Lin RJ , Egan DA , Evans RM .
Molecular genetics 135. differentiation of haematopoietic progenitor cells : of acute promyelocytic leukemia .
Trends Genet .
10 .
Cheng GX , Zhu XH , Men XQ , et al .
Distinct leu- role of the RARa2 isoform in normal granulopoi-1999 ; 15:179-184. kemia phenotypes in transgenic mice and differ- esis and leukemia .
Blood .
1997 ; 90:44a .
.
Kogan SC , Bishop JM .
Acute promyelocytic leu- ent corepressor interactions generated by promy- _ 17 , | abrecque J , Allan D , Chambon P , Iscove NN , kemia : from treatment to genetics and back .
On- elocytic leukemia variant fusion genes PLZF- Lohnes D , Hoang T. Impaired granulocytic differ-cogene .
1999 ; 18:5261-5267 .
RABRalpha and NPM-RARalpha .
Proc Natl Acad entiation in vitro in hematopoietic cells lacking .
Zhong S , Salomoni P , Pandolfi PP .
The transcrip- Sci U S A .
1999 ; 96:6318-6323. retinoic acid receptors alpha1 and gamma .
Blood .
tional role of PML and the nuclear body .
Nat Cell 11 .
Kogan SC , Hong SH , Shultz DB , Privalsky ML , 1998 ; 92:607-615 .
Biol .
2000 ; 2 : E85-E90 .
Bishop JM .
Leukemia initiated by PMLRARalpha : __ 18 .
Largman C , Detmer K , Corral JC , Hack FM , Law .
Chen 2 , Brand NJ , Chon A otal .
Fusionbameen - omen -- rence Expressionattaincie teidrecoplor a novel Kruppel-like zinc finger gene and the reti- Blood .
2000:95:1541-1550 ﬁes-7299 1'82 urman 'eukemia ces .
Blood .
noic acid receptor-alpha locus due to a variant `` `` OC `` P99 ONE 1 ( 11 ; 17 ) translocation associated with acute pro- 12 .
Hong SH , David G , Wong CW , Dejean A , Prival- 19 .
Breitman TR , Selonick SE , Collins SJ .
Induction myelocytic leukaemia .
EMBO J .
1993 ; 12:1161- sky ML .
SMART corepressor interacts with PLZF of differentiation of the human promyelocytic leu-1167 .
and with the PML-retinoic acid receptor alpha kemia cell line ( HL-60 ) by retinoic acid .
Proc Nat !
.
Wells RA , Catzavelos C , Kamel-Reid S. Fusion of ( RARglpha ) a .
“ PLZF-RARalpha ( InncoproteIi ns Acad Sci U S A .
1980 ; 77:2936-2940. retinoic acid receptor alpha to NuMA , the nuclear associated with ac_ute promyelctcytfc leukemia .
20 .
Gratas C , Menot ML , Dresch C , Chomienne C. wou .
.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A .
1997 ; 94:9028-9033 .
200. .
.
mitotic apparatus protein , by a variant transloca- Retinoid acid supports granulocytic but not ery-tion in acute promyelocytic leukaemia .
Nat Genet .
__ 13 .
Lin RJ , Nagy L , Inoue S , Shao W , Miller WH Jr , throid differentiation of myeloid progenitors in nor-1997 ; 17:109-113 .
Evans RM .
Role of the histone deacetylase com- mal bone marrow cells .
Leukemia .
1993 ; 7:1156- .
Redner RL , Rush EA , Faas S , Rudert WA , Corey plex in acute promyelocytic leukaemia .
Nature .
1162 .
SJ .
The t ( 5 ; 17 ) variant of acute promyelocytic leu- 1998 ; 391:811-814 .
21 .
Tsai S , Collins SJ .
A dominant negative retinoic kemia expresses a nucleophosmin-retinoic acid 14 .
Grignani F , De Matteis S , Nervi C , etal .
Fusion acid receptor blocks neutrophil differentiation at receptor fusion .
Blood .
1996 ; 87:882-886. proteins of the retinoic acid receptor-alpha recruit the promyelocyte stage .
Proc Natl Acad Sci .
Amould C , Philippe C , Bourdon V , Gregoire MJ , histone deacetylase in promyelocytic leukaemia .
U S A .
1993 ; 90:7153-7157 .
Berger R , Jonveaux P. The signal transducer and Nature .
1998 ; 391:815-818 .
22 .
Onodera M , Kunisada T , Nishikawa S , Sakiyama activator of transcription STATS5b gene is a new 15 .
Guidez F , Ivins S , Zhu J , Soderstrom M , Waxman Y , Matsumoto S. Overexpression of retinoic acid receptor alpha suppresses myeloid cell differentiation at the promyelocyte stage .
Oncogene .
1995 ; 11:1291-1298 .
1320 23 .
24 .
25 .
26 .
27 .
286 .
29 .
30 .
31 .
32 .
33 .
34 .
35 .
36 .
From www .
bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
KASTNER et al Du C , Redner RL , Cooke MP , Lavau C. Overexpression of wild-type retinoic acid receptor alpha ( RARalpha ) recapitulates retinoic acid-sensitive transformation of primary myeloid progenitors by acute promyelocytic leukemia RARalpha-fusion genes .
Blood .
1999 ; 94:793-802 .
Tocci A , Parolini I , Gabbianelli M , et al .
Dual action of retinoic acid on human embryonic/fetal hematopoiesis : blockade of primitive progenitor proliferation and shift from multipotent/erythroid/ monocytic to granulocytic differentiation program .
Blood .
1996 ; 88:2878-2888 .
Lufkin T , Lohnes D , Mark M , et al .
High postnatal lethality and testis degeneration in retinoic acid receptor alpha mutant mice .
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A .
1993 ; 90:7225-7229 .
Lohnes D , Kastner P , Dierich A , Mark M , LeMeur M , Chambon P. Function of retinoic acid receptor gamma in the mouse .
Cell .
1993 ; 73:643-658 .
Ghyselinck NB , Bavik C , Sapin V , et al .
Cellular retinol-binding protein | is essential for vitamin A homeostasis .
EMBO J .
1999 ; 18:4903-4914 .
Lohnes D , Mark M , Mendelsohn C , et al .
Function of the retinoic acid receptors ( RARs ) during development ( 1 ) : craniofacial and skeletal abnormalities in RAR double mutants .
Development .
1994 ; 120:2723-2748 .
Jacobsen SE , Fahiman C , Blomhoff HK , Okken-haug C , Rusten LS , Smeland EB .
All-trans- and 9-cis-retinoic acid : potent direct inhibitors of primitive murine hematopoietic progenitors in vitro .
J Exp Med .
1994 ; 179:1665-1670 .
Hestdal K , Ruscetti FW , Ihle JN , et al .
Characterization and regulation of RB6G-8C5 antigen expression on murine bone marrow cells .
J Immu-nol .
1991 ; 147:22-28 .
Nauss KM , Mark DA , Suskind RM .
The effect of vitamin A deficiency on the in vitro cellular immune response of rats .
J Nutrit .
1979 ; 109:1815-1823 .
Nagy L , Kao HY , Chakravarti D , et al .
Nuclear receptor repression mediated by a complex containing SMART , mSin3A , and histone deacetylase .
Cell .
1997 ; 89:373-380 .
Chen JD , Evans RM .
A transcriptional co-repres-sor that interacts with nuclear hormone receptors .
Nature .
1995 ; 377:454-457 .
Horlein AJ , Naar AM , Heinzel T , et al .
Ligand-in-dependent repression by the thyroid hormone receptor mediated by a nuclear receptor co-re-pressor .
Nature .
1995 ; 377:397-404 .
Lawson ND , Berliner N. Neutrophil maturation and the role of retinoic acid .
Exp Hematol .
1999 ; 27:1355-1367 .
Kuwata T , Wang IM , Tamura T , et al .
Vitamin A 37 .
38 .
39 .
40 .
41 .
42 .
43 .
44 .
45 .
46 .
47 .
48. deficiency in mice causes a systemic expansion of myeloid cells .
Blood .
2000 ; 95:3349-3356 .
Leroy P , Krust A , Zelent A , et al .
Multiple isoforms of the mouse retinoic acid receptor alpha are generated by alternative splicing and differential in duction by retinoic acid .
EMBO J .
1991 ; 10:59-69 .
Chih DY , Chumakov AM , Park DJ , Silla AG , Koet-fler HP .
Modulation of mRNA expression of a novel human myeloid-selective CCAAT/enhancer binding protein gene ( C/EBP epsilon ) .
Blood .
1997 ; 90:2987-2994 .
Park DJ , Chumakov AM , Vuong PT , et al .
CCAAT/ enhancer binding protein epsilon is a potential retinoid target gene in acute promyelocytic leukemia treatment .
J Clin Invest .
1999 ; 103:1399-1408 .
Yamanaka R , Barlow C , Lekstrom-Himes J , et al .
Impaired granulopoiesis , myelodysplasia , and early lethality in CCAAT/enhancer binding protein epsilon-deficient mice .
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A .
1997 ; 94:13187-13192 .
Liu M , Lee MH , Cohen M , Bommakanti M , Freedman LP .
Transcriptional activation of the Cdk inhibitor p21 by vitamin D3 leads to the induced differentiation of the myelomonocytic cell line U937 .
Genes Dev .
1996 ; 10:142-153 .
Nakayama K. Cip/Kip cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors : brakes of the cell cycle engine during development .
Bioessays .
1998 ; 20:1020-1029 .
Taniguchi T , Endo H , Chikatsu N , et al .
Expression of p21 ( Cip1/Waf1/Sdi1 ) and p27 ( Kip1 ) cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors during human hematopoiesis .
Blood .
1999 ; 93:4167-4178 .
Muto A , Kizaki M , Yamato K , et al .
1,25-Dihy-droxyvitamin D3 induces differentiation of a retinoic acid-resistant acute promyelocytic leukemia cell line ( UF-1 ) associated with expression of p21 ( WAF1/CIP1 ) and p27 ( KIP1 } .
Blood .
1999 ; 93 : 2225-2233 .
Yaroslavskiy B , Watkins S , Donnenberg AD , Patton TJ , Steinman RA .
Subcellular and cell-cycle expression profiles of CDK-inhibitors in normal differentiating myeloid cells .
Blood .
1999 ; 93 : 2907-2917 .
Liu M , Lavarone A , Freedman LP .
Transcriptional activation of the human p21 ( WAF1/CIP1 ) gene by retinoic acid receptor : correlation with retinoid induction of U937 cell differentiation .
J Biol Chem .
1996 ; 271:31723-31728 .
Lawrence HJ , Sauvageau G , Humphries RK , Largman C. The role of HOX homeobox genes in normal and leukemic hematopoiesis .
Stem Cells .
1996 ; 14:281-291 .
Foley KP , McArthur GA , Queva C , Hurlin PJ , Sori-ano P , Eisenman RN .
Targeted disruption of the 49 .
50 .
51 .
52 .
53 .
54 .
55 .
56 .
57 .
58 .
59 .
BLOOD , 1 MARCH 2001 « VOLUME 97 , NUMBER 5 MYC antagonist MAD1 inhibits cell cycle exit during granulocyte differentiation .
EMBO J .
1998 ; 17 : 774-785 .
Paul CC , Mahrer S , Tolbert M , et al .
Changing the differentiation program of hematopoietic cells : retinoic acid-induced shift of eosinophil-committed cells to neutrophils .
Blood .
1995 ; 86:3737-3744 .
Purton LE , Bernstein ID , Collins SJ .
All-trans retinoic acid enhances the long-term repopulating activity of cultured hematopoietic stem cells .
Blood .
2000 ; 95:470-477 .
Grignani F , Ferrucci PF , Testa U , et al .
The acute promyelocytic leukemia-specific PML-RAR alpha fusion protein inhibits differentiation and promotes survival of myeloid precursor cells .
Cell .
1993 ; 74:423-431 .
Rousselot P , Hardas B , Patel A , et al .
The PML-RAR alpha gene product of the t ( 15 ; 17 ) translocation inhibits retinoic acid-induced granulocytic differentiation and mediated transactivation in human myeloid cells .
Oncogene .
1994 ; 9:545-551 .
Kastner P , Perez A , Lutz Y , et al .
Structure , localization and transcriptional properties of two classes of retinoic acid receptor alpha fusion proteins in acute promyelocytic leukemia ( APL ) : structural similarities with a new family of onco-proteins .
EMBO J .
1992 ; 11:629-642 .
Pandolfi PP , Alcalay M , Fagioli M , et al .
Genomic variability and alternative splicing generate multiple PML/RAR alpha transcripts that encode aberrant PML proteins and PML/RAR alpha isoforms in acute promyelocytic leukaemia .
EMBO J .
1992 ; 11:1397-1407 .
Bauer A , Mikulits W , Lagger G , Steng !
G , Brosch G , Beug H. The thyroid hormone receptor functions as a ligand-operated developmental switch between proliferation and differentiation of erythroid progenitors .
EMBO J .
1998 ; 17:4291-4303 .
Wang ZG , Ruggero D , Roncheitti S , et al .
PML is essential for multiple apoptotic pathways .
Nat Genet .
1998 ; 20:266-272 .
Quignon F , De Bels F , Koken M , Feunteun J , Ameisen JC , de The H. PML induces a novel caspase-independent death process .
Nat Genet .
1998 ; 20:259-265 .
Pearson M , Carbone R , Sebastiani C , et al .
PML regulates p53 acetylation and premature senes-cence induced by oncogenic Ras .
Nature .
2000 ; 406:207-210 .
Minucci S , Maccarana M , Cioce M , et al .
Oli-gomerization of RAR and AML1 transcription factors as a novel mechanism of oncogenic activa-tion .
Mol Cell .
2000 ; 5:811-820 .
From www .
bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
® 2001 97 : 1314-1320 doi:10.1182/blood.V97.5.1314 Positive and negative regulation of granulopoiesis by endogenous RAR C 4 _ 5 , ' _ > , # 04 ; @ `` 20 Philippe Kastner , H. Jeffrey Lawrence , Caroline Waltzinger , Norbert B. Ghyselinck , Pierre Chambon and Susan Chan Updated information and services can be found at : http : //www.bloodjournal.org/content/97/5/1314.full.html Articles on similar topics can be found in the following Blood collections Hematopoiesis and Stem Cells ( 3573 articles ) Information about reproducing this article in parts or in its entirety may be found online at : requests Information about ordering reprints may be found online at : http : //www.bloodjournal.org/site/misc/rights.xhtml # reprints Information about subscriptions and ASH membership may be found online at : http : //www.bloodjournal.org/site/subscriptions/index.xhtml Blood ( print ISSN 0006-4971 , online ISSN 1528-0020 ) , is published weekly by the American Society of Hematology , 2021 L St , NW , Suite 900 , Washington DC 20036 .
Copyright 2011 by The American Society of Hematology ; all rights reserved .
