Developmental Immunology , 2000 , Vol .
8 ( 1 ) , pp .
31-45 Reprints available directly from the publisher Photocopying permitted by license only © 2000 OPA ( Overseas Publishers Association ) N.V .
Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint , part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group .
in Developing Thymocytes ALISON M. MICHIE `` and JUAN CARLOS ZUNIGA-PFLUCKER ( Received October 29 , 1999 ) Information regarding the intracellular signaling processes that occur during the development of T cells has largely been obtained with the use of transgenic mouse models , which although providing invaluable information are time consuming and costly .
To this end , we have developed a novel system that facilitates the in vivo analysis of signal transduction pathways during T-lymphocyte development .
This approach uses reporter-plasmids for the detection of intracellular signals mediated by the mitogen-activated protein kinase or cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase .
Reporter-plasmids are transfected into thymocytes in fetal thymic organ culture by accelerated DNA/particle bombardment ( gene gun ) , and the activation of a signaling pathway is determined in the form of a standard luciferase assay .
Importantly , this powerful technique preserves the structural integrity of the thymus , and will provide an invaluable tool to study how thymocytes respond to normal environmental stimuli encountered during differentiation within the thymic milieu .
Thus , this method allows for the monitoring of signals that occur in a biological time frame , such as during differentiation , and within the natural environment of differentiating cells .
Keywords : Cellular signaling , FTOC , T-cell development , thymus , transfection Abbreviations : cyclic AMP , cyclic adenosine monophosphate , CREB , cyclic AMP response , element binding protein , CMV , cytomegalovirus , FTOC , fetal thymic organ culture , DN , CD4 `` CD8 double negative thymocytes , DP , CD4* CD8+* double positive thymocytes , MAPK , mitogen-activated protein kinase , PKA , cyclic AMP dependent protein kinase , PMA , phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate , SCF , stem cell factor , TCR , T cell antigen receptor Printed in Malaysia In Vivo Detection of Intracellular Signaling Pathways Department of Immunology , 1 King 's College Circle , University of Toronto , Toronto , Ontario M5S 1A8 , Canada INTRODUCTION Thymocyte development is characterized by the stage-specific expression of CD4 and CD8 surface molecules ( Godfrey and Zlotnik , 1993 ; Shortman and Wu , 1996 ; Zufiiga-Pfliicker and Lenardo , 1996 ) .
The earliest thymic immigrants , arriving from the fetal liver or bone marrow , lack CD4 and CD8 expression ( CD4 CD8 , double negative ( DN ) ) ( Godfrey et al .
, 1993 ) .
Only thymocytes that successfully rearrange their TCR-B locus expand and differentiate to the CD4* CD8* ( double positive , DP ) stage ; a checkpoint known as B-selection ( Hoffman et al .
, 1996 ; von Boehmer and Fehling , 1997 ) .
Following B-selection , the initiation of TCR- « gene expression and rearrangement occurs ( von Boehmer and Fehling , 1997 ) .
DP * Corresponding author .
Tel .
: 416-978-8217 , Fax : 416-978-1938 , E-mail : alison.michie @ utoronto.ca .
31 32 ALISON M. MICHIE and JUAN CARLOS ZUNIGA-PFLUCKER thymocytes expressing a complete afB-TCR/CD3 complex undergo further checkpoints , positive and negative selection ( Fowlkes and Schweighoffer , 1995 ; Kisielow and von Boehmer , 1990 ) , which result in the generation of CD4* CD8 and CD4 CD8t mature thymocytes .
The intracellular signaling pathways that surround these checkpoints and drive the maturation process of thymocytes are - not well-defined .
Transgenic mouse models have enabled the identification of key signaling components necessary during T-cell development , such as Ras , Rho GTPase , Lock , SLP-76 , LAT , ZAP-70 ( Clements et al .
, 1998 ; Galandrini et al .
, 1997 ; Levin et al .
, 1993 ; Molina et al .
, 1992 ; Negishi et al .
, 1995 ; Swan et al .
, 1995 ; Swat et al .
, 1996 ; Zhang et al .
, 1999 ) .
Although these studies are informative , they fail to provide a biological time frame for the activation of proximal and distal signaling pathways that occur at checkpoints during T cell development .
To study the regulation of gene expression or cellular signaling events during thymocyte development several experimental strategies are available .
These approaches rely on the introduction of foreign DNA into thymocytes ( Ziifniga-Pfliicker et al .
, 1993 ) .
A wide variety of DNA transfection protocols have been developed , such as the use of retroviruses , liposomes , adenoviruses , gene gun-bombardment , and electroporation ( Crompton et al .
, 1996 ; Michie and Ziuniga-Pfliicker , 2000 ; Rooke et al .
, 1997 ; Sugawara et al .
, 1998 ; Suzuki et al .
, 1991 ; Ziifiiga-Pfliicker et al .
, 1993 ) .
Each of these approaches has its own merits and drawbacks , depending on the stage of development being studied and the type of assay system employed for analytical readout .
Retroviral infection of early fetal thymocytes allowed for stable expression of transduced genes during thymocyte differentiation ( Crompton et al .
, 1996 ; Pallard et al .
, 1999 ; Sugawara et al .
, 1998 ) .
Crompton et al .
( 1996 ) , achieved this by directly infecting fetal thymic lobes , and Sugawara et al .
( 1998 ) reconstituted fetal thymic lobes with thymocytes infected by coculture with a retroviral packaging cell line .
Rooke et al .
( 1997 ) used adenovirus-mediated infection to transduce thymic stroma , as these quiescent cells are not susceptible to retroviral infection .
Electroporation of thymocytes has also been carried out , and has the advantage of being easily applicable to thymocytes in cell suspension ( Michie and Zufiga-Pfliicker , 2000 ; Nickoloff , 1995 ; Zdfiiga-Pfliicker et al .
, 1993 ) .
Thus , allowing for the isolation , by flow cytometry cell sorting or magnetic bead separation , of a particular target population of thymocytes to be transfected .
Previous innovations in tissue culture techniques resulted in the creation of an in vitro T-cell development system that is amenable to controlled experi-mentation ; this technique is known as the fetal thymic organ culture ( FTOC ) ( Anderson and Jenkinson , 1998 ; Anderson et al .
, 1996 ) .
FTOC 's involve the culturing of thymic lobes in an air-liquid interphase , providing favorable conditions for normal growth and differentiation ( Jenkinson et al .
, 1982 ) .
In contrast to thymocytes grown in standard suspension cultures , which normally undergo rapid apoptotic death , FTOCs maintain an intact thymic stromal architec-ture , thus providing an appropriate environment for thymocyte differentiation ( Anderson and Jenkinson , 1998 ) .
Therefore , the FTOC system allows for the study of thymocyte development within its natural physiological in vivo setting .
We have developed an approach that uses an accelerated DNA/particle bombardment ( gene gun ) delivery system to transfect thymocytes in FTOC ( ZGuniga-Pfliicker et al .
, 1993 ) .
Here we have combined this non invasive means of DNA delivery into thymocytes with a novel reporter-plasmid system , which allows intracellular signaling cascades to be monitored via reporter-gene plasmids , such as luciferase and B-galactosidase .
In this report , we have characterized the optimal conditions with which to study two signaling pathways within thymic lobes , involving mitogen-activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) and CREB-mediated signaling pathways through cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase ( PKA ) .
The introduction of reporter-plasmids into thymic lobes without disrupting the thymic microenvironment permits the study of biochemical signaling events in real time and within a relevant biological setting .
DETECTION OF CELL SIGNALS IN FTOC 33 RESULTS Detection of Intracellular Signaling Pathways with Reporter-Plasmids The cellular signaling processes that govern developmental checkpoints during T-cell maturation within the thymus are not well defined .
Therefore , we have developed a technique that combines gene gun-mediated transfection of FTOCs with reporter-plasmids that allows intracellular signaling cascades to be monitored in an in vivo setting and in a biological time frame .
A novel system for the in vivo detection of different signal transduction pathways , such as those involving MAPK and PKA , involves the use of commercially available reporter-plasmids ( Fig .
1 ) .
This approach takes advantage of three plasmids : the first one encodes for a fusion protein containing an activation domain derived from the specific substrate recognition site for each kinase ( pFA-Elk or pFA2-CREB ) and a DNA-binding protein domain derived from the yeast DNA transcriptional activator GAL4 ; the second plasmid encodes for the luciferase gene controlled by five repeats of a GALA4-binding element followed by a basic transcriptional promoter { TATATA ) ( pFR-Luc ) ; the third plasmid provides a positive control , encoding for constitutively active version of the kinase to be tested ( pFC-MEK1 or pFC-PKA ) , which is under the transcriptional control of strong enhancer/promoter elements .
When the fusion-activator and luciferase-reporter plasmids are cotransfected - into - mammalian - cells , - activa-tion-induced phosphorylation of the fusion-activator protein by its cognate kinase results in the transcription of the luciferase gene from the pFR-Luc reporter-plasmid .
The intensity of the activa-tion-induced intracellular signal can be measured by carrying out a standard luciferase assay ( Fig .
1 ) .
To control for transfection efficiency , thymocytes were cotransfected with a plasmid encoding B-galactosi-dase , which is under the transcriptional control of the cytomegalovirus ( CMV ) promoter/enhancer .
The B-galactosidase activity is used to index the luciferase signal obtained from each sample , as assays for luci- ferase and B-galactosidase activity can be performed within the same sample tube ( see Materials and Methods ) .
This is accomplished using a novel detection system , in which both enzymatic reactions are measured in the form of light emission ; that is luciferase on the catalytic breakdown of the substrate luciferin , and B-galactosidase on catalysis of the substrate Galac-ton-Plus .
Detection of Signaling Pathways in Stimulated EL4 Cells Our first aim was to demonstrate that the reporter-plasmids were responsive to known inducers of MAPK or CREB-mediated pathways .
Initially , we used electroporation to transfect MAPK-signaling reporter-plasmids into ELA cells .
Our results show that cells transfected with the fusion-activator plasmid , pFA-Elk and the luciferase reporter-plasmid , pFR-Luc and then treated with phorbol ester , phor-bol-12-myristate-13-acetate ( PMA ) and the calcium ionophore , ionomycin show an induction ( > 200 fold ) of luciferase activity , as compared to control untreated cells ( Fig .
2a ) .
These results indicated that activation of the MAPK-signaling cascade can be detected following stimulation with PMA/ionomycin .
As a positive control , cells co-transfected with a plasmid containing a constitutively active MEK1 , pFC-MEK1 showed maximal luciferase activity in the presence or absence of exogenous stimulation ( Fig .
2a ) .
Moreover , we have previously demonstrated that the transfection of thymocyte suspensions with pFA-Elk and pFR-Luc , and subsequent stimulation of these cells with PMA/ionomycin led to a similar activation of luciferase activity ( Michie and Zaniga-Pfliicker , 2000 ) .
In a similar fashion , we transfected PKA-signaling reporter-plasmids into ELA cells .
Our results show that ELA cells transfected with pFA2-CREB- and pFR-Luc-plasmids elicited a greater than ten fold stimulation of luciferase activity upon addition of the adenylyl cyclase activator , forskolin , as compared to control untreated cells ( Fig .
2b ) .
As a positive control , cells co-transfected with a plasmid containing a constitutively active PKA , pFC-PKA showed a maximal 34 ALISON M. MICHIE and JUAN CARLOS ZUNIGA-PFLUCKER CMV | [ Afizactive - ( Optional ) Constitutively Active Kinase AL4 d i GALA UA TTA Luciferase Pathway-specific fusion I Reporter-plasmid trans-activator protein Gene gun El A .
Gh nnn an me a ectroporate plasmids ( @ ) © .
2 ge , *08 , ® ,0 into EL4 cells fetal thymic lobes C ~ De novo signal leads to the phosphorylation of pathway-specific frans-activator Pathway specific kinase Phosphorylated trans-activator binds Po to GAL4 UAS and activates 4 Luciferase expression Assay for Luciferase FIGURE 1 /n vivo signal transduction pathway reporting systems .
This experimental system takes advantage of three plasmids : the first plasmid encodes for a fusion protein containing an activation domain derived from the specific substrate recognition site for each kinase ( eg .
, pFA-Elk for MAPK and pFA2-CREB for PKA ) and a DNA binding protein domain derived from the yeast DNA transcriptional activator GALA ; the second plasmid encodes for the luciferase gene controlled by five repeats of GAL4 binding element followed by a basic transcriptional promoter ( TATATA ; pFR-Luc ) ; the third plasmid is the gene of interest or a positive control encoding for constitutively active versions of each of the kinases to be tested , which are under the transcriptional control of strong enhancer/promoter elements ( pFC-MEK1 and pFC-PKA ) .
When the fusion-activator plasmid luciferase-reporter plasmid are cotransfected into mammalian cells , phosphorylation of the fusion-activator protein by its cognate kinase leads to the transcriptional activation luciferase gene from the reporter plasmid .
The intensity of signal can be measured by carrying out a standard luciferase assay luciferase activity with or without the addition of for- To demonstrate that these plasmids provided a sen-skolin ( > 40 fold ; Fig .
2b ) .
sitive readout for biological events , such as anti DETECTION OF CELL SIGNALS IN FTOC 35 MAPK signalling plasmids PK A-signalling plasmids a. b .
10000 ~ 1000 [ ] Control [ [ J Control 1000 < j PMA/ionomycin §§ Forskolin E= [ = 8 3 100 4 3 e £ E 2 - 100 4 § 3 3 ( s a e B I- $ 0 104 10 4 3 1 .
t 1 m R pFR-lue - + pFA-Elk - + pPCMEK1I pPR-Juc - + pFAZ-CREB - +pFC-PKA ¢ .
d. 300 - 40 250 - a [ ] Control 30 4 [ ] J Control go 2 @ 7 M aCD2-stimulated s M 2C ) stimulated & B E § € aso 4 & 204 3 3 2 0 100 - 2 10 { h 50 0 - o LL pEéR-luc + pFA-Flk pEHR-luc + pFA2-CREB FIGURE 2 Activation of specific signaling cascades upon stimulation of transfected EL4 cells with pharmacologic agents or anti-CD3 mon-oclonal antibody ( 145-2C11 ) .
ELA cells were transfected with reporter-plasmids as indicated .
MAPK-signaling plasmid transfections are shown in ( a ) and ( c ) , and PKA-signalling plasmid transfections are shown in ( b ) and ( d ) .
The transfected cells were incubated overnight at 37°C and then stimulated for 6 hr with : ( a ) PMA/ionomycin ( 10 ng/ml ) ; ( b ) forskolin ( 20 ug/m1 ) ; or ( c ) and ( d ) plate-bound anti-CD3 .
Cells were lysed and the lysates were assayed for luciferase and B-galactosidase activity .
In each of the conditions , stimulation of the cells transfected with fusion-activator plasmids , pFA-Elk or pFA2-CREB , and the luciferase reporter plasmid , pFR-Luc , leads to an induction of luciferase activity , compared to unstimulated cells .
Positive control cells transfected with ( a ) an active MEK 1-plasmid , pFC-MEK 1 , or ( b ) an active PKA-plasmid , pFC-PKA , both show maximal luciferase activity with or without stimulation , whereas only background luciferase activity is detected in cells transfected with pFR-Luc alone body-mediated engagement of the TCR/CD3 fusion-activator plasmids , pFA-Elk or pFA2-CREB , complex , we transfected ELA cells with the luciferase to readout the activation of MAPK- or CREB-medi-reporter-plasmid ( pFR-Luc ) and either of the ated pathways , respectively .
Our results indicate that 36 ALISON M. MICHIE and JUAN CARLOS ZUNIGA-PFLUCKER engagement of the TCR/CD3 complex , with plate bound anti-CD3-mAb ( 145-2C11 ) , led to the activation of both MAPK- and CREB-mediated signaling cascades ( Figs .
2¢ and d ) .
Indeed , aggregation of the TCR/CD3 complex in pFA-Elk-transfected cells showed an induction of luciferase activity ( > ten fold ) , compared to unstimulated cells ( Fig .
2¢ ) , while nearly a four fold stimulation in luciferase activity was observed in pFA2-CREB-transfected cell ( Fig .
2d ) .
Gene Gun-Mediated Transfection of FTOCs As previously stated , our aim is to employ the reporter-plasmids to obtain a sensitive readout of signaling events that occur during thymocyte maturation and differentiation .
Thus , experiments were carried out using fetal thymic lobes from day 14 timed-pregnant CD1 mice as targets for gene gun-mediated plasmid transfection with a Helios Gene Gun ( see Materials and Methods ) .
Our previous experiments have shown that accelerated DNA/gold particles can transfect thymocytes to a depth of six to eight cell layers in the thymus ( ZGdfiiga-Pfliicker et al .
, 1993 ) .
Transfection of FTOCs with a plasmid encoding for green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) bound to gold particles allowed us to determine the transfection efficiency of thymocytes within fetal thymic lobes .
Flow cytometric analysis of thymic suspensions obtained from gene gun-transfected FTOCs showed a transfection efficiency of 0.8-3 % GFP* thymocytes .
The proportion of thymocytes transfected was determined by staining cell suspensions with a leukocyte-specific marker ( CD45 ) and analyzing for GFP* cells within the CD45* population ( Fig .
3a ) .
This analysis demonstrates that the GFP* cells represent developing thymocytes rather than thymic stromal elements , such as the epithelial cells encasing the thymus or cortical epithelial cells within the fetal thymus .
Figure 3a shows GFP expression is evident in 1.2 % of the CD45* leukocyte population .
To demonstrate that FTOC transfection by DNA/gold particle bombardment , when combined with the reporter-plasmids provides a reliable and sensitive assay system , we transfected thymic lobes with plasmids-encoding luciferase and B-galactosi- dase , under the transcriptional control of CMV pro-moter/enhancer elements .
Eighteen hours after transfection , a 35-fold elevation in luciferase activity was observed , as compared to mock-transfected lobes ( Fig .
3b ) .
Additionally , B-galactosidase activity was elevated six fold over mock-transfected controls ( Fig .
3b ) .
It is apparent from these results that luciferase activity provides a more sensitive readout system for recording the activation of signaling pathways , while B-galactosidase activity exhibits a robust signal , appropriate for indexing purposes .
Developmental Progression of Transfected Thymocytes Within FTOCs To further examine the impact of gene gun-transfection on the ability of the thymus to support T lym-phopoiesis , and the preservation of the thymic microenvironment , we investigated the longterm developmental potential of transfected thymocytes .
Therefore , we transfected recombinase activating gene-2-deficient ( RAG-2 `` ~ ) mouse fetal thymic lobes with a plasmid encoding a constitutively active form of the GTPase Ras , ( p21 `` *Y ' ) ( Downward et al .
, 1988 ; Swat et al .
, 1996 ) .
Differentiation of thymocytes from RAG-2 mice is halted at the CD117 CD25* stage , prior to the generation of DP cells , due to the cells inability to initiate rearrangement of their TCR-B locus ( Shinkai et al .
, 1992 ) .
It has been previously shown that the introduction of a transgene encoding an active Ras into RAG mice induces cellular proliferation and differentiation of CD4 CD8 DN thymocytes to the CD4* CD8* DP stage of development , indicating that Ras plays an essential role during B-selection ( Swat et al .
, 1996 ) .
To demonstrate that transfection of thymocytes in FTOC does not interfere with the normal thymocyte proliferation and developmental progression , consistent with a transition through B-selection , RAG-2 FTOCs were gene gun-transfected with plasmid encoding a constitutively active Ras .
FTOCs were incubated for 9 days and then analyzed by flow cytometry .
In comparison to the mock-transfected { control ) FTOCs ( Fig .
4a ) , CD25 expression was downregulated in Ras-transfected FTOCs , with a con DETECTION OF CELL SIGNALS IN FTOC 37 a .
No DNA ( CD45+ gated ) GFP ( CD45+ gated ) Z ] & 0 j 1 & ] * ] Background ( 0 % ) 1 GFP+ = 1.24 % _~ ] t \| T 4 GFP b. no DNA Rg CmVv Enzymatic activity ( RLUs ) CMV -luc CMV-B-gal FIGURE 3 Transfection of fetal thymic lobes with : ( a ) Green Fluorescent Protein ( GFP ) or ( b ) plasmids encoding luciferase and B-galactosidase .
( a ) Intact fetal thymic lobes removed from time-pregnant CD1 mice ( day 13 of gestation ) were used as targets for DNA-covered gold particles .
After 6 hr in culture on nucleopore filters , intact lobes were briefly removed from their gel foam support and subjected to bombardment by accelerated DNA/gold particles ( 200 psi ) using a Helios Gene Gun ( Bio-Rad Laboratories ) .
In this experiment , intact lobes were transfected with plasmid DNA encoding GFP ( DLR = 1.5 ug ) .
After 18 hr incubation , the lobes were analyzed by flow cytometry for the appearance of GFP within the leukocyte population of cells ( CD45* -gated ) .
Mock transfected cells were bombarded with gold particles alone .
Shown is a representative experiment of GFP transfection , showing green fluorescence in 1.24 % of the cells within the lymphocyte population .
( b ) Transfection of fetal thymic lobes with plasmids encoding luciferase and -galactosidase .
Intact fetal thymic lobes removed from timed-pregnant CD1 mice ( day 14 of gestation ) were used as targets for DNA-covered gold particles , as described .
In this experiment , intact lobes were transfected with plasmid DNA-encoding CMV-luciferase and CMV-B-galactosidase ( DLR = 250 ng ) .
After 18 hr incubation , the cells were lysed and the resulting lysates were assayed for luciferase and B-galactosidase activity .
The results indicate that there is a 35 fold elevation in luciferase activity over mock transfected background and a six fold elevation in B-galactosidase activity over background levels .
The data shown is an average of seven independent experiments 38 ALISON M. MICHIE and JUAN CARLOS ZUNIGA-PFLUCKER comitant upregulation of both CD8 and CD4 mole-cules , indicating that differentiation to the CD4* CD8+* DP stage of development has occurred ( Fig .
4b ) .
Moreover , an increase in thymic cellularity was evident in Ras-transfected FTOCs compared with mock-transfected ( control ) FTOCs ( 2.4 x 104 vs. 0.56 x 104 cells/lobe , respectively ) .
Therefore , these results suggest that gene gun-transfection does not impair the thymic microenvironment and leaves the thymic stromal cells functionally intact .
Indeed , this finding mirrors the developmental progression observed in transgenic mice ( Swat et al .
, 1996 ) , thus supporting the notion that the thymic microenvironment and the signals generated within transfected thymocytes are the same as those produced in vivo .
Detection of Activated Signaling Pathways in FTOC 's In order to define the conditions required for the optimal readout of MAPK- and PKA- signaling pathways , thymic lobes were transfected with increasing amounts of pFA-Elk or pFA2-CREB plasmids , while maintaining constant levels of the reporter- and index-ing-plasmids ( Figs .
5 and 6 ) .
Induction of luciferase activity was apparent in FTOCs transfected with reporter-plasmids ( pFA-Elk , pFR-Luc , and B-galactosidase ) and then stimulated with PMA/ionomycin ( Fig .
5 ) .
Although an increase in the amount of pFA-Elk caused a slight elevation in background luciferase activity , the addition of PMA/ionomycin to transfected FTOCs led to a clear induction of luciferase activity in each sample .
Maximum stimulation of luciferase activity , at nearly three fold stimulation over background , was seen in FTOCs transfected with 250 ng of pFA-Elk ( Fig .
5 ) .
At this amount , the ratio between - fusion-activator- - and - reporter-plasmids ( pFA-Elk : pFR-Luc ) is 1:1 .
Thus , these two plasmids should be used at this ratio to gain optimal readout of the MAPK signalling cascade in fetal thymic lobes .
Similarly , we have defined the optimal conditions for detecting CRER-mediated signals in thymocytes within thymic lobes .
FTOCs were transfected by DNA/gold bombardment - with - reporter-plasmids ( pFAZ-CREB , pFR-Luc and B-galactosidase ) and then treated with forskolin .
The lobes were transfected with increasing amounts of pFA2-CREB while keeping the concentration of the other plasmids constant ( Fig .
6 ) .
An elevation in background luciferase activity was not evident on increasing the concentration of pFA2Z-CREB plasmid .
However , the addition of forskolin led to a significant stimulation of luciferase activity in every sample , with the maximum induction ( > four fold stimulation ) detected at 75 ng of pFA2-CREB ( Fig .
6 ) .
This result indicates that the optimal ratio of pFA2-CREB : pFR-Luc for attaining maximal readout of PKA activity in fetal thymic lobes is 0.3:1 .
Thus , these two plasmids should be used at this ratio to gain optimal readout of the PKA signalling cascade in FTOC 's .
Our findings demonstrate that despite the low transfection efficiency of FTOCs by gene gun-bombardment , the sensitivity of the readout system clearly allows for the study of biochemical signaling cascades in real-time and in a relevant biological setting .
The use of this novel and powerful model system provides an important tool for the further elucidation of signaling pathways regulating key checkpoints during T cell development in the thymus .
DISCUSSION The method described in this paper relies on the combination of two experimental approaches : ( 1 ) a reporter-plasmid system enabling the detection of de novo intracellular signaling pathways in vivo and , ( 2 ) a method for the transfection of thymocytes within an intact thymic - microenvironment ( Michie and ZGfiiga-Pfliicker , 2000 ; Zuniga-Pfliicker et al .
, 1993 ) .
To this end , we have developed the use of reporter-plasmids together with a DNA/particle bombardment delivery system to transfect thymocytes in FTOC , permitting the study of biochemical signaling events in real time and within a relevant biological setting .
One application of this approach involved the characterization of MAPK- and CREB-mediated intracellular signalling pathways within the thymus .
There are many advantages of this transfection system compared with other methods available : ( 1 ) the DETECTION OF CELL SIGNALS IN FOC 39 a .
- Control b .
- Constitutively active Ras-transfected CD8 CD8 CD4 FIGURE 4 Generation of CD4+® CD8+* double positive cells in RAG-2 lobes transfected with constitutively active Ras .
Intact fetal thymic lobes removed from timed pregnant RAG-2¢ mice ( day 14 of gestation ) were used as targets for DNA-covered gold particles , as described in the legend to Fig .
3 .
In this experiment , fetal thymuses were gene gun-transfected with either ( a ) no DNA ( control ) or ( b ) constitutively active Ras ( Ha-Ras ( V 12 ) ; DLR = 750 ng ) , and then cultured for nine days in FTOC .
After this time , a single cell suspension of the fetal thymic lobes was prepared and thymocytes were analyzed for surface expression of CD25 , CD8 and CD4 , by flow cytometry specific signaling cascades can be read out in vivo and __ can be transfected simultaneously , enabling the study within the thymic environment ; ( 2 ) multiple plasmids of direct or indirect interactions between proteins ; ( 3 ) 40 ALISON M. MICHIE and JUAN CARLOS ZUNIGA-PFLUCKER the transfection process is rapid and without apparent alteration of the thymic microenvironment ; ( 4 ) the entire procedure requires less than 48 hours to com-plete ; ( 5 ) this method offers a cost-effective means to study signaling components during T cell develop-ment ; ( 6 ) the amount of tissue required is small ( 4 to 6 fetal thymic lobes/ transfection ) ; ( 7 ) the amount of DNA required is small ( 25-250 ng ) ; and ( 8 ) despite the transient nature of the transfection , it may be possible to examine long term developmental effects following the introduction of a particular gene at a specific stage of development .
The key signaling components required for lymphocyte development have been largely determined by phenotypic and molecular characterization of mice with targeted gene deficiencies , and by the introduction of dominant negative or constitutively active kinases into developmentally blocked mice ( von Boehmer et al .
, 1999 ) .
While these studies have provided invaluable information , they are time consuming , costly , and do not provide direct and detailed evidence for signaling mechanisms that emanate from the gene product of interest .
Our gene-gun transfection technique , coupled with the reporter-plasmid system , should allow for the detection of signaling cascades generated from the activation of upstream kinases .
To this end , it is important to point out that our present findings validate this approach by showing that transfection of RAG-deficient DN thymocytes with a constitutively active Ras induced the developmental progression to the DP stage , and thus experimentally bypassed pre-TCR-mediated signals .
It is well known that removal of thymocytes from their microenvironment severely interferes with their normal developmental processes and leads to the induction of apoptosis ( Fisher et al .
, 1996 ) .
Indeed , it has been demonstrated that perturbation of thymic stromal interactions with developing T cells leads to a spontaneous upregulation of TCR-af complex on the surface of the cells together with dephosphorylation of the CD3F chain ( Nakayama et al .
, 1990 ) .
Moreover , thymocytes cultured in suspension or within intact lobes respond differently to stimulation with PMA , mitogen Concanavalin A , or anti-CD3 ( Anderson and Jenkinson , 1998 ; Fisher et al .
, 1996 ) .
These and other studies indicate that the interactions within the intact thymic environment play an essential role in determining the biological outcome to specific stim-uli .
Therefore , the method described here is of central importance , as it provides an important tool to the study the regulation of T cell development by enabling researchers to define signaling mechanisms within the cell 's natural environment .
Although gene gun-mediated - transfection - of FTOCs allows thymocytes to respond to their normal environment , other means of in vitro gene transfer also confer this ability .
In particular , retroviral-medi-ated infection of cells has proven to be a viable means with which to study specific gene function during thymocyte differentiation ( Crompton et al .
, 1996 ; Pallard et al .
, 1999 ; Sugawara et al .
, 1998 ) .
However , one main benefit of the gene-gun system is the ability to transfect multiple plasmids into thymocytes , which can be read out in short or long term assays .
Thus , this system permits the expression of specific genes during T cell development , together with the use of a separate reporter-plasmid allowing for the readout of de novo signaling events .
MATERIALS AND METHODS Animals Timed-pregnant CD1 mice were obtained from the Charles River Laboratories ( St .
Constant , QC Can-ada ) .
- Recombinase - activating - gene-2-deficient ( RAG-2/ ~ ) mice ( Shinkai et al .
, 1992 ) were bred and maintained in our animal facility .
Timed-pregnant RAG-2 `` mice were generated and the fetuses were extracted at day 14 of pregnancy .
Electroporation of ELA Cells All plasmid DNA used for transfection was purified by anion-exchange chromatography using Qiagen columns ( Valencia , CA ) .
PathDetect reporter-plasmids were purchased from Stratagene ( La Jolla , CA ) .
EL4 cells were washed and placed in RPMI-1640 DETECTION OF CELL SIGNALS IN FTOC 41 15 « .
-- » _ Unstimulated | -- @ -~ PMA/ionomycin < 10 7 & < .9 8 23 € t ; L 73 o < es 5 4 0 `` *T T -r Or- r -r -r `` f T T r-r-or-rf T4 Ratio ( pFA-Elk : pFR-Luc ) FIGURE 5 Activation of MAPK signalling cascade on stimulation of fetal thymic lobes with phorbol ester , phorbol-12-myristate-1 3-acetate ( PMA ) and the calcium ionophore , ionomycin .
Intact fetal thymic lobes removed from timed-pregnant CD1 mice ( day 14 of gestation ) , were used as targets for DNA-covered gold particles , as described in the legend of fig .
3 .
Fetal thymuses were gene gun-transfected with pFR-Luc ( DLR = 250 ng ) , pFA-Elk ( DLR = 25-750 ng ) , and CMV-B-gal ( DLR = 250 ng ) , and then cultured for 12 to 18 hr prior to addition of PMA/ionomycin ( 10 ng/ml of each ) for a further 6 to 8 hr .
Cells were lysed and the lysates were assayed for luciferase and -galactosidase activity .
The optimal concentration of pFA-Elk in fetal thymic lobes is 250 ng/shot ( DLR = 250 ng ) , as almost a three fold stimulation is observed in luciferase activity and thus MAPK activity .
The results shown are an average of four separate experiments with each condition carried out in triplicate medium supplemented with 20 % FCS .
Cells were Diego , CA ) Electro Cell Manipulator 600 apparatus transfected by electroporation using a BTX ( San _- with each sample containing 1-3 x 10° cells per 42 ALISON M. MICHIE and JUAN CARLOS ZUNIGA-PFLUCKER cuvette ( 4-mm gap ) in 250 ul medium .
Samples were incubated on ice for 10 min with 21-50 ug plasmid DNA ( as indicated in figure legends ) and then elec-troporated at 250 V , 1200 uF , 186 © with a ~60 ms time constant .
After electroporation , samples were incubated on ice for 10 min , and then cultured for 18 to 24 hr in DMEM-high glucose media ( Gibco-BRL , Gaithersburg , MD ) supplemented with 10 % FCS , 2 mM glutamine , 10 U/ml penicillin , 100 ug/ml !
strepto-mycin , 100 pg/ml gentamicin , 110 ug/ml sodium pyruvate , 50 uM 2-mercaptoethanol , and 10 mM Hepes , pH 7.4 ( EL4 medium ) .
Phorbol-12-myr-istate-13-acetate ( PMA ) , ionomycin , or forskolin ( Sigma , St. Louis , MO ) were added to the cells as described in the figure legends .
Preparation of DNA/Gold Suspension The DNA/gold bound cartridges were prepared as described by the manufacturer 's protocol ( Bio-Rad Laboratories , Hercules , CA ) .
The amount of microcarriers ( gold powder , spherical ( 1.5 to 3.0 microns ; Aldrich Chemical Co. , Milwaukee , WI ) ) to be delivered to the target ( fetal thymic lobes ) is referred to as the Microcarrier Loading Quantity ( MLQ ) .
Our protocol is optimized for an MLQ of 1 ug of gold .
The amount of DNA loaded per microgram of microcarriers is referred to as the DNA Loading Ratio ( DLR ) .
In this protocol , the DLR for total plasmid DNA is 0.65 : 1.4 .
It should be noted that , as the MLQ= 1 ug , the DLR for each plasmid ( detailed in the figure legends ) is equivalent to the amount of DNA delivered to the fetal thymic lobes in each transfection .
To prepare the DNA/gold suspension , 100 ul of 0.05 M spermidine was added to 40 ug of gold particles .
This solution was vortexed and sonicated for 3 to 5 seconds to remove gold clumps .
To the gold/spermidine mixture , DNA ( 1 to 30 ug of each plasmid ) was added to a final volume not exceeding 100 pul , and vortexed .
While vortexing , the DNA was precipitated onto gold particles by adding 100 ul 1 M CaCl ; dropwise .
This was left to stand for 10 min at room temperature ( RT ) , then the gold/DNA bound particles were pelleted .
The supernatant was removed and the pellet was washed 3 times in anhydrous ethanol ( Aldrich Chemical Co. ) .
After the final wash , the pellet was resuspended in 24 ml anhydrous ethanol containing 0.1 % polyvi-nylpyrrolidone ( PVP ; Bio-Rad Laboratories ) and kept in an airtight tube .
The DNA/gold suspension is ready for cartridge preparation , however it can be stored for up to 2 months at -20°C .
Preparation of DNA/Gold-Coated Cartridges In order to generate DNA/gold bound cartridges , a Tubing Prep Station is required ( Bio-Rad Laboratories ) .
Immediately prior to preparing cartridges , the Gold-Coat tubing ( Bio-Rad Laboratories ) was dried by purging with nitrogen for 15 min .
Seventy-five centimeters of dried tubing was then placed in the Tubing Prep Station .
The DNA/gold particle suspension was vortexed , then drawn into a syringe and injected into the dried tubing .
The microcarriers were allowed to settle for 3 to 5 min then the ethanol/PVP solution was slowly drawn back into the syringe , leaving the DNA-bound gold in the tubing .
The syringe was removed and the Gold-Coat tubing was immediately turned 180° to allow the gold to coat the inside of the tubing .
After 10 seconds , the tubing is rotated for 3 to 5 min , thus coating the tube with gold/DNA particles .
Following the tube coating with the DNA/gold , the tubing was dried by passing nitrogen for 3 min .
The DNA/gold-coated tube was removed from the Tubing Prep Station , and cut into 1.25 , cm cartridges using a Tubing Cutter ( Bio-Rad Laboratories ) .
The DNA/gold slurry ( 2.4 ml ) generates 40 cartridges with the desired MLQ .
The prepared cartridges can be stored at 4°C for up to 8 months .
Transfection of Fetal Thymuses Fetal thymuses isolated from gestational day 13-14 time-pregnant mice were placed on prewetted Nucleopore filters ( 13 mm , 0.8 um pore size , polycar-bonate ) ( Corning , NY ) , 4 to 6 lobes per filter in FTOC media ( EL4 media supplemented with a further 5 % FCS ) .
The filters were placed on top of media-soaked Gelfoam ( Upjohn Canada , Don Mills , ON ) rafts .
DETECTION OF CELL SIGNALS IN FTOC 43 5 = « « « - @ - » +- _ Unstimulated - -- & @ -- _ FOorskOlin 4 [ = 3 .J .3 A3 .E | brs `` 3 +4 U 1 J- T .g-.ll.l-II'-.o l `` I 0 -- - ... .
, ._ `` _0__ , .
-- ..- J. L 0 ~ `` u -r ~~~ ~I 0.1 1 10 Ratio ( pFA2-CREB : pFR-Luc ) FIGURE 6 Activation of PKA signaling cascade on stimulation of fetal thymic lobes with the adenylyl cyclase activator , forskolin .
Intact fetal thymic lobes removed from timed-pregnant CD1 mice ( day 14 of gestation ) were used as targets for DNA-covered gold particles , as described in the legend of Fig .
3 .
Fetal thymuses were gene gun-transfected with pFR-Luc ( DLR = 250 ng ) , pFA-CREB ( DLR = 25-750 ng ) , and CMV-B-gal ( DLR = 250 ng ) , and then cultured for 12 to 18 hr prior to addition of forskolin ( 20 ug/m !
1 ) for a further 6 to 8 hr .
Cells were lysed and the lysates were assayed for luciferase and B-galactosidase activity .
The optimal concentration of pFAZ-CREB-activator in fetal thymic lobes is 75 ng/shot ( DLR = 75 ng ) , as > four fold stimulation is seen in luciferase activity and thus PKA activity .
The results shown are an average of six separate experiments with each condition carried out in triplicate After 6 hr , the filters carrying the fetal thymic lobes diately transfected by gene gun-bombardment with a were transferred onto a petri dish ( 6 mm ) , and imme- __ Helios Gene gun set at 200 psi ( Bio-Rad Laborato- 44 ALISON M. MICHIE and JUAN CARLOS ZUNIGA-PFLUCKER ries ) , using one cartridge per set of lobes .
The filters carrying the transfected fetal lobes were then placed back onto the Gelfoam rafts and incubated at 37°C for 8-24 hr in a humidified incubator with 5 % CO ; .
Alternatively , the transfected lobes were incubated for 4 to 6 hr prior to the addition of pharmacological reagents as stated in the figure legends .
Thereafter , the lobes were incubated for an additional 12 to 18 hr prior to analysis .
For long-term developmental progression analysis , transfected fetal thymic lobes were incubated for 9 days , changing FTOC media once during the incubation .
Luciferase and B-Galactosidase Assay A single-cell suspension was prepared in phos-phate-buffered saline ( PBS ; Gibco-BRL ) from transfected thymic lobes by crushing the lobes through a prewetted 70 um nylon mesh filter ( BioDesign , Car-mel , NY ) .
The cells were then assayed for luciferase and B-galactosidase activities using the Dual-Light reporter gene assay - system - ( Tropix , - Perkin Elmer-Applied Biosystems , Norwalk , CT ) .
Briefly , thymocytes were lysed in 25 ul Lysis Buffer ( 40 mM Tricine , pH 7.8 , 50 mM NaCl , 2 mM EDTA , 1 mM MgSQO4 , 5 mM dithiothrietol ( DTT ) , 1 % Triton X100 ) for 15 min at RT , and then centrifuged ( 13,000 g ) for 5 min to remove cell debris .
The supernatant was combined with an equal volume of Luciferase Reaction Buffer ( 30 mM Tricine , pH 7.8 , 3 mM ATP , 15 mM MgSQ4 , 1 mM Coenzyme A , 10 mM DTT ) , and after addition of 1 mM luciferin ( 100 ul ) the sample was immediately assayed for luciferase activity , with a Lumat LB 9507 Luminometer ( Fischer Scientific Canada , Unionville , ON ) , with light emission read out for 10 seconds .
To assay for B-galactosidase activity , Galacton-Plus ( substrate for B-galactosidase ; Tropix ) was added to each tube after the luciferase assay was completed .
The tubes were incubated at RT for 30 to 60 min , then Accelerator-II ( 100 ul ; Tropix ) was added to each tube and the samples were immediately assayed for B-galactosidase activity , measured as light emission with a Lumat LB 9507 Luminometer , with light emission read out for 10 seconds .
Results shown represent the averages of assays carried out in triplicate .
Flow Cytometric Analysis Transfected fetal thymic lobes were incubated at 37°C for the desired time ( as described in figure legends ) , then single-cell suspensions were prepared .
The cells were incubated with anti-mouse antibodies in FACS buffer ( Hank 's balanced salt solution ( without phenol red ) containing 1 % BSA and 0.05 % NaN ; ) for 30 min on ice .
The antibodies used were as follows : FITC-conjugated CD25 ( 7D4 ) ; R-PE-conjugated CD8a ( 53-6.7 ) ; APC-conjugated CD4 ( RM4-5 ) , or biotinylated CD45 ( 30F11.1 ) purchased from Pharmingen ( San Diego , CA ) .
The stained thymocytes were then washed twice in FACS buffer and , where biotinylated antibodies were used , incubated for a further 20 min on ice in the presence of Strepta-vidin-APC ( Pharmingen ) .
Stained cells were washed twice in FACS buffer and analyzed with a FACSCal-iber flow cytometer using CELLQuest software ( Bec-ton-Dickinson , Mountain View , CA ) , ; data was live-gated by size and lack of propidium iodide uptake .
Acknowledgements We would like to thank Dr. Pamela Ohashi for the plasmid encoding constitutively active Ras .
A. M. Michie is supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the Cancer Research Institute .
J. C. Zuniga-Pfliicker is supported by a scholarship from the Medical Research Council of Canada .
This work is funded by a grant from the Leukemia Research Fund of Canada .
References Anderson , G. , and Jenkinson , E.J .
( 1998 ) .
Use of Explant Technology in the Study of In Vitro Immune Responses .
J. Immu-nolog .
Methods 216 ; 155-163 .
Anderson , G. , Moore , N.C. , Owen , J.J. , and Jenkinson , E.J .
( 1996 ) .
Cellular interactions in thymocyte development .
Annu .
Rev .
Immunol .
74 ; 73-99 .
Clements , J.L .
, Yang , B. , Ross-Barta ; S. E. , Eliason , RF .
, William-son , R.A. , and Koretzky , G.A .
( 1998 ) .
Requirement for the Leukocyte-Specific Adapter Protein SLP-76 for normal T cell development .
Science 281 : 416-419 .
Crompton , T. , Gilmour , K.C .
, and Owen , M.J. ( 1996 ) .
The MAP kinase pathway controls differentiation from double-negative to double positive thymocyte .
Cell 86 : 243-251 .
Downward , J. , de Gunzburg , J. , Rich ] , R. , and Weinberg , R.A. ( 1988 ) .
p21ras-induced responsiveness of phosphatidylinosi- DETECTION OF CELL SIGNALS IN FTOC 45 tol turnover to bradykinin is a receptor number effect .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 85 : 5774-5778 .
Fisher , G.H .
, Lenardo , M.J. , and Zdfiga-Pfliicker , J.C. ( 1996 ) .
Synergy between T cell receptor and Fas ( CD95/APO-1 ) signalling in mouse thymocyte death .
Cell .
Immunol .
769 ; 99-106 .
Fowlkes , B.J .
, and Schweighoffer , E. ( 1995 ) .
Positive selection of T cells .
Curr .
Opin .
Immunol .
7 , 188-195 .
Galandrini , R. , Henning , S.W .
, and Cantrell , D.A .
( 1997 ) .
Different Functions of the GTPase Rho in Prothymocytes and Late Pre-T cells .
Immunity 7 ; 163-174 .
Godfrey , D.L , Kennedy , J. , Suda , T. , and Zlotnik , A .
( 1993 ) .
A developmental pathway involving four phenotypically and functionally distinct subsets of CD3 CD4 CD8 `` triple negative adult mouse thymocytes defined by CD44 and CD25 expres-sion .
J. Immunol .
150 ; 4244-4252 .
Godfrey , D.L .
, and Zlotnik , A .
( 1993 ) .
Control points in early T-cell development .
Immunol .
Today 14 ; 547-553 .
Hoffman , E.S .
, Passoni , L. , Crompton , T. , Leu , T.M.J .
, Schatz , D.G .
, Koff , A. , Owen , M.J. , and Hayday , A.C. ( 1996 ) .
Productive T-cell receptor B-chain gene rearrangement : coincident regulation of cell cycle and clonality during development in vivo .
Genes and Dev .
10 ; 948-962 .
Jenkinson , E.J .
, Franchi , L. , Kingston , R. , and Owen , J.J.T .
( 1982 ) .
Effects of deoxyguanosine on lymphopoicesis in the developing thymus rudiment in vitro : application in the production of chimeric thymus rudiments .
Eur .
J. Immunol .
72 , 583 .
Kisiclow , P. , and von Boehmer , H. ( 1990 ) .
Negative and positive selection on immature thymocytes : timing and the role of lig-and for o/B T cell receptor .
Semm .
Immunol .
2 ; 35-44 .
Levin , S.D .
, Anderson , S.J .
, Forbush , K.A .
, and Perlmutter , R.M .
( 1993 ) .
A dominant-negative transgene defines a role for p56 `` in thymopoiesis .
EMBO J .
72 ; 1671-1680 .
Michie , A.M. , and Zdfiga-Pfliicker , J.C. ( 2000 ) .
Transfection and Transcription of Genes in Developing Thymocytes .
In Methods in Molecular Biology : Protocols in T cell Development and Activation , K.P .
Kearse , ed .
( Totawa , NJ : Humana Press ) , 134 ; 55-62 .
Molina , T.J. , Kishihara , K. , Siderovski , D.P .
, van Ewijk , W. , Nav-endran , A.W .
, Timms , E. , Wakeham , A. , Paige , C.J .
, Hart-mann , K.U .
, Veillette , A. , Davidson , D. , and Mak , T.W .
( 1992 ) .
Profound block in thymocyte development in mice lacking p56 `` .
Nature 357 ; 161-164 .
Nakayama , T. , June , CH .
, Munitz , T.L , Sheard , M. , McCarthy , S.A. , Sharrow , $ .0. , Samelson , L. E. , and Singer , A .
( 1990 ) .
Inhibition of T cell receptor expression and function in mature CD4+ CD8+ cells by CD4 .
Science 249 ; 1558 .
Negishi , I. , Motoyama , N. , Nakayama , K. , Senju , S. , Hatakeyama , S. , Zhang , Q. , Chan , A.C. , and Loh , D.Y .
( 1995 ) .
Essential role for ZAP-70 in both positive and negative selection of thymocytes .
Nature 376 ; 435-438 .
Nickoloff , J.A .
( 1995 ) .
Animal cell electroporation and electrofu-sion Protocols .
In Methods in Molecular Biology , J.A .
Nickoloff , ed .
( Totowa , NJ : Humana Press ) 48 ; 115-121 .
Pallard C. , Stegmann , A P. , van Kleffens , T. , Smart ; F. , Venkitara-man , A. , and Spits , H. ( 1999 ) .
Distinct roles of the phosphati-dylinositol 3-kinase and STATS pathways in IL-7-mediated development of human thymocyte precursors .
Immunity 10 ; 525-535 .
Rooke , R. , Waltzinger , C. , Benoist , C. , and Mathi , D. ( 1997 ) .
Targeted complementation of MHC class II deficiency by intrath-ymic delivery of recombinant adenoviruses .
Immunity 7 ; 123-134 .
Shinkai , Y. , Rathbun , G. , Lam , K.-P. , Oltz , E.M. , Stewart , V. , Men-delsohn , M. , Charron , J. , Datta , M. , Young , F. , Stall , A.M. , and Alt , EW .
( 1992 ) .
RAG-2-deficient mice lack mature lym-phocytes owing to inability to initiate V ( D ) J rearrangement .
Cell 68 ; 855-867 .
Shortman , K. , and Wu , L. ( 1996 ) .
Early T lymphocyte progenitors .
Ann .
Rev .
Immunol .
14 ; 29-47 .
Sugawara , T. , Di Bartolo , V. , Miyazaki , T. , Nakauchi , H. , Acuto , O. , and Takahama , Y .
( 1998 ) .
An improved retroviral gene transfer technique demonstrates inhibition of CD4-CD§8-thy-mocyte development by kinase-inactive ZAP-70 .
J. Immunol .
161 ; 2888-2894 .
Suzuki , H. , Zelphati , O. , Hildebrand , G. , and Leserman , L. ( 1991 ) .
CD4 and CD7 molecules as targets for drug delivery from antibody bearing liposomes .
Exp .
Cell .
Res .
193 ; 112-119 .
Swan , K.A .
, Alberola-la , J. , Gross , J.A .
, Appleby , M.W .
, Forbush , K.A .
, Thomas , J.F .
, and Perlmutter , R.M .
( 1995 ) .
Involvement of p21ras distinguishes positive and negative selection in thymocytes .
EMBO J 14 ; 276-285 .
Swat , W. , Shinkai , Y. , Cheng , HL .
, Davidson , L. , and Alt , EW .
( 1996 ) .
Activated ras signals differentiation and expansion of CD4+CD8+ thymocytes .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 93 ; 4683-4687. von Boehmer , H. , Aifantis , I. , Feinberg , J. , Lechner , O. , Saint-Ruf , C. , Walter , U. , Buer , J. , and Azogui , O .
( 1999 ) .
Pleiotropic changes controlled by the pre-T-cell receptor , Curr .
Opin .
Immunol .
77 ; 135-142. von Boehmer , H. , and Fehling ; H.J .
( 1997 ) .
Structure and function of the pre-T cell receptor .
Annu .
Rev .
Immunol .
15 ; 433-452 .
Zhang , W. , Sommers , C.L .
, Burshtyn , D.N .
, Stebbins , C.C .
, DeJar-nette , J.B. , Trible , RP .
, Grinberg , A. , Tsay , H.C. , Jacobs , H.M. , Kessler , C.M .
, Long , E.0 .
, Love , P.E .
, and Samelson , L. E , ( 1999 ) .
Essential role of LAT in T cell development .
Immunity 10 ; 323-332 .
Zaniga-Pfliicker , J.C. , and Lenardo , M.J. ( 1996 ) .
Regulation of thymocyte development from immature progenitors .
Curr .
Opin .
Immunol .
8 ; 215-224 .
Zuniga-Pfliicker , J.C. , Schwartz , HL .
, and Lenardo , M.J. ( 1993 ) .
Gene transcription in differentiating immature T cell recep-tor `` thymocytes resembles antigen-activated mature T cells .
J. Exp .
Med .
178 ; 1139-1149 .
