2 nozzles per well enable cell Check out how Laminar Wash l washing by creating a laminar I .
: CURIOX systems replace centrifugation completely in handling cells See How It Works Accelerating Life Sciences Sa meJournal f Transcription Factor NF- < B Regulates IgA -- -- f'Immun010 gy Light Chain Gene Rearrangement Heather H. Bendall , Michael L. Sikes and Eugene M. Oltz This information is current as __ J Jpmunol 2001 ; 167:264-269 ; ; of May 10 , 2019. doi : 10.4049/jimmunol.167.1.264 http : //www .jimmunol.org/content/167/1/264 References _ This article cites 27 articles , 13 of which you can access for free at : http : //www .jimmunol.org/content/167/1/264 .
full # ref-list-1 Why The JT ?
Submit online .
« Rapid Reviews !
30 days* from submission to initial decision * No Triage !
Every submission reviewed by practicing scientists * Fast Publication !
4 weeks from acceptance to publication *average Subscription _- Information about subscribing to The Journal of Immunology is online at : http : //jimmunol.org/subscription Permissions _ Submit copyright permission requests at : http : //www.aai.org/About/Publications/Jl/copyright.html Email Alerts _ Receive free email-alerts when new articles cite this article .
Sign up at : http : //jimmunol.org/alerts The Journal of Immunology is published twice each month by The American Association of Immunologists , Inc. , 1451 Rockville Pike , Suite 650 , Rockville , MD 20852 Copyright © 2001 by The American Association of Immunologists All rights reserved .
Print ISSN : 0022-1767 Online ISSN : 1550-6606 .
6107 '0t 4epy uo 1san8 4q [ 810 fountwrut [ 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor Transcription Factor NF-B Regulates IgA Light Chain Gene Rearrangement ' Heather H. Bendall , Michael L. Sikes , and Eugene M. Oltz `` The tissue- and stage-specific assembly of Ig and TCR genes is mediated by a common V ( D ) J recombinase complex in precursor lymphocytes .
Directed alterations in the accessibility of V , D , and J gene segments target the recombinase to specific Ag receptor loci .
Accessibility within a given locus is regulated by the functional interaction of transcription factors with cognate enhancer elements and correlates with the transcriptional activity of unrearranged gene segments .
As demonstrated in our prior studies , rearrangement of the Ig locus is regulated by the inducible transcription factor NF-xB .
In contrast to the Ig locus , known transcriptional control elements in the IgA locus lack functional NF-KB binding sites .
Consistent with this observation , the expression of assembled IgA genes in mature B cells has been shown to be NF-rB independent .
Nonetheless , we now show that specific repression of NF-B inhibits germline transcription and recombination of IgA gene segments in precursor B cells .
Molecular analyses indicate that the block in NF-xB impairs IgA rearrangement at the level of recombinase accessibility .
In contrast , the activities of known IgA promoter and enhancer elements are unaffected in the same cellular background .
These findings expand the range of NF-KB action in precursor B cells beyond Igx to include the control of recombinational accessibility at both L chain loci .
Moreover , our results strongly suggest the existence of a novel IgA regulatory element that is either directly or indirectly activated by NF-B during the early stages of B cell development .
The Journal of Immunology , 2001 , 167 : 264-269. genes via a program of DNA recombination involving large arrays of V , D , and J gene segments .
The lymphoid-specific components of V ( D ) J recombinase , recombination-activating genes ( RAG ) *-1 and RAG-2 , initiate recombination by generating double-strand breaks at recombination signal sequences ( RSSs ) that flank all Ag receptor gene segments ( 1 , 2 ) .
RAG-mediated cleavage produces two distinct intermediates , termed coding ends ( CEs ) and signal ends ( SEs ) , which are differentially processed before their resolution by ubiquitous DNA repair en-zymes .
In general , SEs are ligated with few modifications to produce flush , extrachromosomal signal joins .
In contrast , nucleotides are randomly added to or deleted from CEs to further diversify chromosomal coding joins ( 3 ) .
Despite the action of a common recombinase on highly conserved RSSs , the assembly of individual Ag receptor genes occurs in a stage- and tissue-specific manner .
Prior studies have demonstrated that substrate specificity is imposed on the recombination process by modulating the accessibility of gene segment clusters within Ig and TCR loci ( 4 , 5 ) .
In the vast majority of cases , recombinational accessibility of a given gene segment correlates temporally with its transcriptional status in vivo ( 4-6 ) .
Consistent P recursor lymphocytes generate functional Ig and TCR Department of Microbiology and Immunology , Vanderbilt University School of Medicine , Nashville , TN 37232 Received for publication February 9 , 2001 .
Accepted for publication April 18 , 2001 .
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges .
This article must therefore be hereby marked adverfisement in accordance with 18 U.S.C .
Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . '
This work is supported by National Institutes of Health Grants AI36944 and AIO1412 ( to E.M.O . )
and a National Cancer Institute predoctoral training grant ( to H.H.B . )
.
2 Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. Eugene M. Oltz , Department of Microbiology and Immunology , Vanderbilt University School of Medicine , A4203 Medical Center North , Nashville , TN 37232-2363 .
E-mail address : oltzem @ ctrvax.vanderbilt.edu ° Abbreviations used in this paper : RAG , recombination-activating gene ; RSS , recombination signal sequence ; CB , coding end ; SE , signal end ; iBx , Ig intronic en-hancer ; LM-PCR , ligation-mediated PCR ; ts , temperature sensitive .
Copyright © 2001 by The American Association of Immunologists with a causal relationship between these two processes , transcriptional promoter and enhancer activities are required for the efficient rearrangement of chromosomal gene segments in cis ( 5-7 ) .
In precursor lymphocytes , fluctuations in the activity of transcription factors that target promoter/enhancer elements likely play a major role in the developmental control of Ig and TCR locus accessibility ( 5 , 8 ) .
The precise molecular mechanisms by which cis-acting elements regulate accessibility remain elusive .
However , recent studies indicate that directed alterations in the chromatin associated with gene segment clusters act to relieve nucleo-some-mediated repression of RSS cleavage by the RAG proteins ( 9 , 10 ) .
In the B lymphocyte lineage , pro-B cells must first rearrange a functional IgH gene before recombination of the Igx locus at the pre-B cell stage ( 11 ) .
In pre-B cell models , the onset of Jr germline transcription and VJx rearrangement requires the induction of transcription factor NF- « B ( 12 ) , which binds to a consensus site in the Ig intronic enhancer ( iEx ) .
Individual pre-B clones that fail to generate an in-frame coding join subsequently initiate rearrangement of the second L chain locus , IgA ( 11 ) .
Relative to Igx , little is known about the transcription factors and DNA elements that regulate recombination of IgA gene segments .
Two nearly identical IgA enhancers ( EA3-1 and EA2-4 ) , which are active in mature B and plasma cells , require binding by the PU.1/IFN regulatory factor-4 transcription factor complex ( 13 ) .
Importantly , EA3-1 and EA2-4 function in an NF- « B-independent manner in these late-stage cells ( 14 ) .
During the course of our studies on Ig regulation ( 12 ) , we discovered that cells defective for NF-KB signaling also were affected at the IgA locus .
Consistent with this initial observation , we now demonstrate that the NF-KB signaling pathway is required to induce germline transcription and recombination of all murine VA and JA gene segments .
In contrast , the activities of known IgA regulatory elements are unaffected in NF- « B-arrested cells .
These findings highlight a novel mechanism by which NF- « B acts as a global regulator of Ig L chain ( IgL ) gene assembly in precursor B cells .
0022-1767/01/ $ 02.00 6107 '0t 4epy uo 1san8 4q [ 810 fountwrut [ 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor The Journal of Immunology Materials and Methods Cell lines and culture The 103/BCL-2/4 pre-B cell line is conditionally transformed with a temperature-sensitive ( ts ) mutant of the v-ab/ oncogene ( 15 , 16 ) .
Stable transfectants of ts-abl expressing a dominant inhibitor of NF-KB , termed IxBAN ( AN.1 , AN.7 ) , and a control line expressing the histidinol resistance gene ( WT.24 ) have been described previously ( 12 ) .
Cells were routinely propagated at 34°C in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10 % FCS , 50 uM 2-ME , and 0.01 % penicillin-streptomycin .
Inactivation of v-abl was achieved by incubation at the nonpermissive temperature ( 38.5°C ) for either 24 or 48 h. DNA PCR Relative levels of V « Jr and VAJA coding joins and total DNA content ( CA ) were assessed by semiquantitative PCR in 25-pl reactions containing 200 ng genomic DNA , 10 mM Tris ( pH 8.3 ) , 1 pg/ml BSA , 200 M dNTPs , Taq polymerase ( 1 U ) , and 25 ng of each primer .
Amplifications were performed as follows : 94°C ( 1 min ) , 60°C ( CA ) or 52°C ( VkJr , VAJA ) for 1 min , and 72°C ( 1.5 min ) for either 24 ( CA ) or 28 cycles ( VkJx , VAJA ) .
All PCR products were separated on 2 % agarose gels and transferred to ZetaProbe membranes ( Bio-Rad , Richmond , CA ) for hybridization with the appropriate radiolabeled probes .
For VA and JA SEs , 2.5 X 10° cells were cultured at the permissive or nonpermissive temperature for 24 or 48 h. Linker-ligated DNA plugs were prepared as described previously ( 17 ) .
SE assays were performed on 3 pl of molten plugs ( 95°C , 10 min ) in reaction mixtures as described for the coding joins assays , except that reactions were incubated at 72°C ( 5 min ) before the addition of Taq polymerase ( 1 U ) .
The 12-cycle amplifications consisted of 1 min at 92°C , 1 min at 52°C , and 1.5 min at 72°C .
An aliquot of the primary PCR ( 2 l ) then was amplified for 28 cycles under the same conditions , but with a nested primer .
RT-PCR analyses Total cellular RNA ( 3 pg ) was treated with RNase-free DNase I ( Promega , Madison , WI ) and subjected to reverse transcription with random hexamer primers .
To discount genomic DNA contamination , all PCR assays included controls lacking reverse transcriptase .
Samples were normalized for cDNA input using a separate PCR specific for B-actin cDNA sequences .
PCR amplifications were performed as follows : 94°C ( 1 min ) , 58°C ( B-actin ) , 50°C ( VA1 , VA2 , Vx ) , or 48°C ( JA1 , JA2/3 ) for 1 min , and 72°C ( 1.5 min ) for either 24 ( G-actin ) or 28 cycles ( IgL germline transcripts ) .
PCR primers and probes Oligonucleotide primers for PCR and Southern blot probes were as follows : VkJ « 2 coding joins : primers Vx ( S ) ( GGCTGCAGSTTCAGTG GAAGTGGGTC ) and 3'Jx2 ( GTGAACAAGAGTTGAGAAGAC ) , probe Jr2 cod ( TTCGGAGGGGGGACCAAGCTGG ) ; VAJA coding joins : primers VAR1 ( ATGAATTCACTGGTCTAATAGGTGGTACCA ) and JAR1 ( TAGAATTCACTYACCTAGGACAG ) , probes VAR ( CTGTGCTCTAT GGTACAGCACCC ) , VAICP ( GGATGAGGCAATAT ) , VAZCP ( GAT GATGCAATGTAT ) , JAICP ( TTGGTGTTCTGGTGG ) , JAZCP ( TAT GTTTTCGGCGGT ) , and JA3CP ( TTTATTTTCGGCAGT ) ; CA control : primers 5'CA ( CAGAATTCACCTTCCYCTGARGAG ) and 3'CA ( GAGTCGACARACTCTTCTCCA ) , probe CAP ( TACGAGAACGA CAGTCCCAG ) ; VAI SEs : primers BW-1H ( CCGGGAGATCTGAATTC CAC ) , 3'VA1-1 ( GGTTCTCTTCTCAATG ) , and 3'VA1-2 ( TATGTTGT GCCAAGTTGG ) , probe 3'VAIP ( AAGTGGTAGTTATGAGACTGT ) ; VAZ SEs : primers BW-1H , 3'VA2-1 ( GTTGATAAACAAAGCTTGTC ) , and 3'VAZ-2 ( ATCAAGGCATAATTATTATAC ) , probe 3'VAZP ( AGAAGATGGTAGTGAGACTG ) ; VA SE control : primers VAR1 ( AT GAATTCACTGGTCTAATAGGTGGTACCA ) and 3'VA1-2 , probe VAP ( GTGTAGATGGGGAAGTAGA ) ; JA2/3 SEs : primers BW-1H , 5'JA2/3-1 ( TACCACCCACTKCWWS ) , and 5'JA2/3-2 ( AGGTCAYAGCTC CACC ) , probes JAZSE ( ACCAGGTGCTGGCCCCATAGG ) and JA3SE ( CCCAGGTGCTTGCCCCACAGG ) ; JA2/3 SE control : primers JAR1 and 3'JA2/3-2 ( AGGTCAYAGCTCCACC ) , probe JAZ/3P ( GGTTGGGTTITY AGTCA ) ; VAl RT-PCR : primers VAB ( CACTTATACTCTCTCTC CTGG ) and VAR , probes VAICP or VAZCP ; Vx RT-PCR : primers VB ( GACATTCAGCTGACCCAGTCTCCA ) and V « RT ( GGCCCGGGTT TWTGTTMWGRBYGTAKCACAGTG ) , probe VR ( GTYCCWGAYC CACTGCCACTGAASC ) ; JAl RT-PCR : primers 5'JA1l-2 ( GATCIT TCAGTGATGTA ) and JAR1 , probe JAICP ; JAZ RT-PCR : primers 3-2 and JAR1 , probe JAZCP ; B-actin RT-PCR : primers 5° B-actin ( AGAGCTATGAGCTGCCTGACGGCC ) and 3 ' B-actin ( AGTAATCTC CTTCTGCATCCTGTC ) , probe 450-bp cDNA amplification product of the 5 ' B-actin and 3 ' B-actin primers .
265 Reporter gene assays The ts-abl clones ( 5 X 10° cells/transfection ) were resuspended in 0.8 ml serum-free medium and transfected transiently with a 0.2-ml mixture containing 12.5 ul of Lipofectin ( Life Technologies , Rockville , MD ) , luciferase plasmid ( 2.5 pg ) , and a control Renilla plasmid ( 0.5 ug , pRL-TK ; Promega ) .
Samples were cultured at 34°C for 5 h , washed in serum-free medium , and resuspended in complete medium .
Subsequently , one-third of the transfected cells were cultured at the permissive temperature , and the remaining two-thirds were incubated at the nonpermissive temperature for 22 h. Firefly and Renilla luciferase activities were measured in protein extracts ( 25 ug ) with a dual assay kit ( Promega ) .
The pVA and pVAEA constructs contain the VA2 promoter alone ( 14 ) or together with EA2-4 ( 14 ) in the BamHI site of the pGL2 basic plasmid ( Promega ) .
The 6x « B plasmid contains six xB binding sites located upstream of a minimal thymidine kinase promoter in pGL2-basic plasmid ( 18 ) .
Results NF-KB regulates Ig gene rearrangement To investigate the transcriptional mechanisms that control IgL gene assembly , we have used a conditionally transformed pre-B cell model that closely mimics the physiology of primary pre-B cells .
Inactivation of the temperature-sensitive v-ab/ oncogene in these cells ( ts-abl cells ) induces levels of RAG gene expression , NF- « B , and IgL rearrangement that are comparable to those observed in vivo ( 12 , 15 , 16 ) .
We generated transfectants of the ts-abl line that stably express a mutant form of the NF- « B inhibitory protein IxBa , termed I « BAN .
This transdominant inhibitor is resistant to signal-dependent proteolysis and blocks nuclear translo-cation of NF- « B complexes containing the transactivating subunits c-Rel and RelA ( 12 ) .
In prior studies , we found that inhibition of the NF-KB signaling pathway in ts-abl cells blocked germline Jx transcription and VxJr rearrangement , presumably by interfering with iEx function ( 12 ) .
Unlike the Ig locus , which contains ~100 Vk gene segments that randomly rearrange with four functional Jx elements , the murine IgA locus primarily uses two V gene segments , VA1 and VA2 ( 19 ) .
In cells that fail to express functional Igx protein , VA segments rearrange preferentially to their most proximal set of JA-CA clusters ( refer to diagram of the IgA locus in Fig .
14 ) .
Prior studies had shown that IgA enhancers lack « B sites and function in plasma cells that are deficient for nuclear NF- « B ( 14 ) .
Therefore , we expected that levels of IgA rearrangements would be unaffected in ts-abl cells expressing a dominant repressor of NF-KB signaling .
To quantify IgA rearrangements in control ts-abl cells ( 103 and WT.24 transfectant lacking IxBAN ) and two IBAN expressing clones ( AN.1 and AN.7 ) , we used a set of degenerate PCR primers that amplify all VAJA coding joins with equal efficiency .
Surpris-ingly , inactivation of v-abl in control cells induced levels of VAJA rearrangement at 48 h that were at least 5- to 10-fold greater than those observed for NF- « B-defective clones ( Fig .
1B , top , lanes 3 , 6 , 9 , and 12 ) .
Recombinase activity was unaffected in IxBAN clones as judged by RAG-1/2 expression and rearrangement of extrachromosomal substrates ( 12 ) .
Similar decreases in VAJA rearrangement were observed when cells cultured at the nonpermissive temperature were sorted for viability before DNA extraction ( data not shown ) .
Thus , IxBAN-expressing cells in the process of VJ or VAJA recombination are not subject to significant negative selection during the 48 h of v-abl inactivation .
The murine IgA locus is organized into two rearrangement cassettes that each contain VA and JA gene segments as well as CA coding exons ( Fig .
1A ) .
As such , we considered the possibility that the IgA locus contains distinct domains , each of which may be differentially regulated by NF- « B .
To test whether all gene segments are equally impaired by c-Rel/RelA corepression , we probed IgA rearrangements in ts-abl DNAs with oligonucleotides specific for each VA or JA coding region .
As shown in Fig .
1C , IxBAN 6107 '0t 4epy uo 1san8 4q [ 810 fountwrut [ 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor 266 NF- « B REGULATES IgA REARRANGEMENT A IgA -a=3 s % w * ~ / ~ I I JA-CA2 - JA-CM VM JA-CAr3 - JA-CM WW B C. $ ANA _ ANZ O 103 , s , > ANA _ ANZ wT24 103 & ' ao oa® `` aP Q “ a > “ g , “ at « ® ' I T s & y & y & ¢ , & _ P T él P ‘ T ‘ T F T ‘ \| P é ] ‘ \| | | .Temp emp IP I I IIa I I I I I lI3 I I d I # “ N3 , & m twig wines ‘ b `` .
“ ‘ w _ VXJX V ) \,1 F cam am v2 m m p -- om ni- » aon < o @ @ iniiipniin « .
- Vicjic1 C “ - - VrJr2 -- -dbiba » - - =- C ) Do b ob dood od ob d ob jb od god 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 C1 _ -- ~ I FIGURE 1 .
IxBAN inhibits V « Jr and VAJA rearrangement .
A , Schematic structure of the murine IgA locus .
Boxes represent coding sequences , triangles depict RSSs , and dashed lines indicate the predominant VA to JA rearrangement events observed in murine B cells ( JA4 is a pseudogene segment lacking a consensus RS and the VAx gene segment rarely rearranges ) .
B , PCR analyses of VJ ( middle ) and VAJA coding joins ( top ) .
Genomic DNAs from the 103-BCL-2/4 pre-B cell line ( 103 ) , transfectants expressing IBAN ( AN.1 and AN.7 ) , or a control transfectant lacking IBAN ( WT.24 ) were cultured at permissive ( P ) or nonpermissive ( N ) temperatures for 24 ( N24 ) or 48 h ( N48 ) .
Rearrangement levels were analyzed with degenerate PCR primers that recognize all V or J gene segments ( see Materials and Methods ) .
The linearity of each PCR assay was confirmed with serial dilutions of the 103/N48 sample ( lanes 12-14 ) , and control reactions were performed without input genomic DNA ( ¢ ) .
A PCR assay specific for the CA coding exon was used to assess relative amounts of input DNA ( bottom ) .
C , Genomic DNA samples were amplified as in B .
Resultant PCR products were analyzed by Southern blotting with oligonucleotide probes specific for VA1 or VAZ .
The specificity of the probes was verified with DNA samples from sequenced VAIJA1 ( VA1 ) or VA2ZJAZ ( VA2 ) coding joins ( right ) .
clones exhibited a 5- to 10-fold reduction in coding joins that use c-Rel and RelA are required for efficient generation of VA and either VA1 or VAZ .
Similar results were obtained with JA1l- , JA2- , JA SEs and JA3-specific probes ( data not shown ) .
Together with published data ( 12 ) , these findings indicate that IxBAN acts as a global repressor of both VJ and VAJA rearrangement in ts-abl pre-B cells .
The repressive effects of IxBAN on VAJA rearrangement in pre-B cells might occur at two distinct levels-accessibility of IgA gene segments or efficient resolution of VA and JA CEs by DNA repair A B C AN.1 _ _AN.Z , WT.24 , _103 & o 8 _ AN.1___AN.Z - WT.24 103 & P & péfypému+§p & e§pxﬂ ’ é§ Temp p & e§p¥ ” é§p & e§p & x & Temp I I 1-4 I Lod Ol U h I I- d I I Io d U I I L- d « m < gp UW Who -- -V ) i SE < n .
.— -Vi2 SE ws « -- - # B - We -M Ww se agam « - CTRL « quan tn » - © h Dod 1 od Pod oo bog bod 1 ) | I 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1112 13 1415 1 % 4 4 $ 06 + & s ad ds dads FIGURE 2. reduces VA and JA SE formation .
A , The indicated ts-abl transfectants were cultured at the permissive ( P ) or nonpermissive ( N ) temperature for 24 ( N24 ) or 48 h ( N48 ) .
Agarose-embedded cells were assayed for VAl ( top ) or VA2 ( middle ) SEs with nested LM-PCR techniques as described previously ( 17 ) .
The identity of each SE ( right ) was verified by comigration with products specifically amplified in bone marrow DNA samples ( data not shown ) .
The linearity of each LM-PCR assay was confirmed with serial dilutions of the 103/N48 sample ( lanes 13-15 ) .
Levels of input DNA were assessed with primers that amplify sequences within the VAZ coding region ( CTRL , bottom ) .
B , Samples in A were amplified by LM-PCR methods that specifically detect JAZ ( fop ) or JA3 SEs ( middle ) .
Control assays for input DNA amplify JAZ coding sequences ( CTRL , bottom ) .
6107 '0t 4epy uo 1san8 4q [ 810 fountwrut [ 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor The Journal of Immunology A AN.1 AN.Z WT.24 103 A » 267 1.0 E C z 0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2- 0 - ... .
COP __ op cnc ui p fr E OE Oj AN AN WT WT AN AN WT WT AN AN WT WT AN AN WT WT AN AN WT WT JM JA2 VM V2 Vr FIGURE 3 .
NF- « B regulates IgA germline transcription .
A , Total RNA from the indicated ts-abl transfectants propagated 24 h at the indicated temperatures were subjected to RT-PCR assays with primer combinations that amplify germline JA gene segments .
PCR products were blotted and probed with oligonucleotides specific for JA1 ( fop ) or JAZ coding sequences ( middle ) .
Relative levels of input cDNA were measured by an RT-PCR assay for B-actin transcripts ( bottom ) .
The linearity of each assay was demonstrated by serial dilutions of the 103/N cDNA ( Zanes 9-11 ) .
B , Quantitation of RT-PCR assays for germline IgL transcripts .
Each bar represents the amount of signal from indicated germline transcription assays ( phosphor imager ; Fuji ) normalized for levels of B-actin signal in each sample .
Data from a representative experiment are shown from control ( WT ) and IxBAN-expressing clones ( AN ) incubated at either the permissive ( ] ) or the nonpermissive ( @ @ ) temperature for 24 h. The maximum normalized signal in each assay was standardized to the value of 1.0 in each data set .
complexes ( 20 ) .
To examine whether IgA accessibility is regulated by NF-KB , levels of RAG-mediated cleavage were monitored with ligation-mediated PCR ( LM-PCR ) assays that specifically detect VA or JA SEs ( 17 ) .
As shown in Fig .
2 , the kinetics of SE appearance for all IgA gene segments was similar to that observed for coding joins .
High levels of A SEs accumulated only after 24-48 h of culturing at the nonpermissive temperature ( Janes 7-12 ) .
Importantly , I < BAN-expressing clones exhibited a 5- to 10-fold reduction in all VA and JA SEs when compared with the control clones ( Fig .
2 , A and B ) .
Our prior studies of extrachromosomal substrates showed that recombination of accessible RSSs is unaffected by IxBAN ( 12 ) .
Together with the data presented in Fig .
2 , these findings strongly suggest that NF-B is required for RAG-mediated cleavage of IgA gene segments , the initial step of VAJA rearrangement .
IgA germline transcription is repressed in Rel-deficient pre-B cells Current evidence suggests that Ag receptor loci are activated for rearrangement via the binding of developmentally regulated transcription factors to Ig and TCR enhancers ( 21 ) .
In turn , functional enhancers direct germline transcription of linked gene segments , which is likely required for their accessibility .
Consistent with this regulatory model , we have demonstrated previously a requirement for c-Rel/ReIA in the activation of Jx-C « germline transcription and rearrangement in ts-abl cells ( 12 ) .
To investigate accessibility mechanisms at the IgA locus , we designed a series of semiquantitative RT-PCR assays that are specific for transcripts derived from unrearranged IgA gene segments .
Initially , total cDNA was prepared from each ts-abl clone cultured at the permissive and 6107 '0t 4epy uo 1san8 4q [ 810 fountwrut [ 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor 268 nonpermissive temperatures .
Subsequent to PCR amplification , germline transcripts were detected with oligonucleotide probes specific for the JA1 or JAZ gene segments , which reside in separate IgA cassettes .
As shown in Fig .
34 , levels of germline JA transcripts were significantly reduced in IxBAN-expressing pre-B cells cultured at the nonpermissive temperature .
Control assays for B-actin ( Fig .
34 , bottom ) and GAPDH coding sequences ( data not shown ) revealed a general diminution in the steady-state levels of most transcripts at the nonpermissive temperature .
To correct for this global effect , germline transcription data were quantified ( phosphor imager ; Fuji , Tokyo , Japan ) and normalized for levels of B-actin transcripts present in each sample .
Results from a representative set of experiments for each VA and JA assay are shown in Fig .
3B .
In wild-type pre-B cells , all VA and JA germline transcripts were induced after inactivation of the v-abl oncogene .
By comparison , there was a consistent reduction in the steady-state levels of germline IgA transcripts measured in IxBAN pre-B clones .
The observed reduction in IgA transcripts was not a general phenomenon , because a separate assay for Vr germline mRNAs revealed no significant differences between the control and IBAN clones at either temperature ( Fig .
3B ) .
These data are qualitatively consistent with those obtained for VAJA rearrangement , indicating a locus-wide repression of IgA accessibility in NF- « B-arrested cells .
IgA promoter and enhancer activities are unaffected by IxBAN Prior DNA sequence analyses provide no evidence for the presence of NF-KB binding sites in the known IgA enhancers ( EA3-1 and EA2-4 ) .
Moreover , both IgA enhancers are fully functional in a plasma cell line that lacks nuclear NF-KB ( 14 ) .
However , it remained possible that NF- « B regulates EA function via an indirect mechanism in earlier stages of B cell development .
In this regard , we have shown that NF- « B controls the inducible expression of Oct-2 , a B lineage-specific transcription factor that binds to critical sites in all Ig promoters ( 22 ) .
To test the possibility that NF-KB regulates known IgA elements in ts-abl cells , we monitored the activity of EA2-4 and the VAZ promoter ( PVA ) with a series of luciferase reporter genes .
As expected , luciferase expression from a control construct driven by a hexamer of NF- « B sites was severely impaired in IBAN clones cultured at the nonpermissive temperature ( Fig .
4 ) .
In contrast , the function of both PVA and EA was similar in the IBAN and control cells .
These data are in keeping with the prior finding that EA activity is NF- « B-independent in mature B cell lines ( 14 ) .
Collectively , our results strongly suggest that IgA germline transcription and recombinational accessibility are regulated independently of EA function in pre-B lymphocytes .
Discussion The advent of pre-B cells harboring a conditional mutant of the v-abl oncogene has provided a unique opportunity to study the regulation of IgL gene transcription and rearrangement while bypassing the effects of cellular transformation .
When cultured at the nonpermissive temperature , these ts-abl cells exhibit levels of nuclear NF-KB , RAG expression , and VxJr rearrangement that are comparable to those observed in bone marrow pre-B cells ( 15 , 16 ) .
By using a dominant mutant of IB , we have shown previously that the NF-KB signaling pathway is critically required for activation of VkJx rearrangement in ts-abl cells ( 12 ) .
Unlike traditional v-abl pre-B cells , the ts-abl lines also execute high levels of IgA gene assembly ( 23 ) .
This unique feature has allowed us to explore the transcription factor requirements for efficient VAJA rearrangement in the appropriate developmental context .
Our results clearly show that NF- « B is required for full activation of IgA germline NF- « B REGULATES IgA REARRANGEMENT 120000 D AN 60000 l 6 ~ L # 40000 \- An 2 z 30000 20000 10000 L____U 0 Lull ) s h 6x xB pVA pVAEA FIGURE 4 .
PVA and EA activities are NF- « B-independent in ts-abl pre-B cells .
Control ts-abl cells ( WT and WT.24 , MM ) and an IxkBAN-ex-pressing clone ( AN.7 , Q ] ) were transfected with luciferase reporter constructs driven by either a hexamer of NF-B binding sites ( 6xxB ) , the VA2Z promoter ( pVA ) , or PVAZ in conjunction with the EAZ-4 enhancer ( pVAEA ) .
Cells were cotransfected with a control plasmid encoding Renilla luciferase and were maintained at the nonpermissive temperature for 22 h. Protein extracts ( 25 pug ) were assayed for firefly and Renilla luciferase activities by standard methods .
Results from a representative experiment are reported as relative light units ( RLU ) for firefly luciferase and are normalized for Renilla luciferase activity .
transcription and the recombinational accessibility of all five VA and JA gene segments .
What is the mechanism by which NF-KB exerts global control over the IgA locus in pre-B cells ?
Our functional data ( Fig .
4 ) exclude the possibility that the core VA promoter ( PVA ) or EA elements are regulated either directly or indirectly by NF-KB in extrachromosomal vectors .
However , VA germline transcription is clearly inhibited in the NF- « B-arrested cells , whereas Vx germline transcription is unaffected ( Fig .
3 ) .
Therefore , it seems likely that endogenous PVA function is potentiated in a chromosomal context by unidentified element ( s ) that respond to the NF-KB signaling pathway in ts-abl cells .
Similarly , NF- « B may control the activities of JA germline promoters .
Emerging studies have identified the presence of JACA germline transcripts in pre-B cells ( 24 ) , but the location and functional architecture of the putative JA promoters remain unknown .
Given the results from germline transcription assays ( Fig .
3 ) , it is tempting to speculate that these promoter elements may be either directly or indirectly regulated by NF-KB .
Resolution of these important issues awaits identification of the precise regulatory sequences within the IgA locus that are NE- « B-responsive in pre-B cells .
In summary , our findings support a model for IgA activation that is highly reminiscent of the mechanisms that regulate Igx activa-tion .
Both L chain loci require c-Rel and RelA for initiation of V-J rearrangement and for J-C germline transcription .
During Igx ac-tivation , NF- « B is thought to function primarily via binding to its cognate site in iEx ( 25 ) .
Mouse knockout studies indicate that iEx is critical for mediating VJr rearrangement in pre-B cells ( 26 ) .
In contrast , the distal 3'Ex is NF- « B-independent and plays a dominant role in constitutive expression of rearranged Ig genes in mature B cells ( 27 ) .
Likewise , the distal IgA enhancers ( EA2-4 and EA3-1 ) , which are NF- « B-independent , are likely to be the major regulators of IgA expression in mature B cell subsets ( 13 ) .
By analogy to iEx , unidentified NF- « B-dependent elements may control initial locus activation in pre-B cells .
In both the ts-abl system and a second pre-B cell model ( 24 ) , the kinetics of IgA germline 6107 '0t 4epy uo 1san8 4q [ 810 fountwrut [ 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor The Journal of Immunology transcription and rearrangement ( 24-48 h ) are delayed relative to Ig ( 12-24 h , data not shown ) .
Because activation of NF-KB in pre-B cells induces Igx gene assembly by its direct binding to iEx , these kinetic data suggest that efficient VAJA rearrangement may require the prior induction of other transcription factors by NF- « B ( e.g .
, Oct-2 ) .
Thus , indirect regulation of a novel IgA element by NF- « B may provide an attractive explanation for the temporal order of L chain gene assembly in pre-B cells .
Acknowledgments We thank Michelle Rohling for technical assistance , Ursula Storb ( Uni-versity of Chicago , Chicago , IL ) for PVA/EA fragments , Larry Kerr for the 6xxB construct , and D. Ballard and W. Khan ( Vanderbilt University , Nashville , TN ) for valuable comments .
References 1 .
Eastman , Q. M. , T. M. Leu , and D. G. Schatz .
1996 .
Initiation of V ( D ) J recombination in vitro obeying the 12/23 rule .
Nature 380:85 .
2. van Gent , D. C. , D. A. Ramsden , and M. Gellert .
1996 .
The RAG1 and RAG2 proteins establish the 12/23 rule in V ( D ) J recombination .
Cell 85:107 .
3 .
Bogue , M. , and D. B. Roth .
1996 .
Mechanism of V ( D ) J recombination .
Curr .
Opin .
Immunol .
8:175 .
4 .
Stanhope-Baker , P. , K. M. Hudson , A. L. Shaffer , A. Constantinescu , and M. S. Schlissel .
1996 .
Cell type-specific chromatin structure determines the targeting of V ( D ) J recombinase activity in vitro .
Cell 85:887 .
5 .
Sleckman , B. P. , J. R. Gorman , and F. W. Alt .
1996 .
Accessibility control of antigen-receptor variable-region gene assembly : role of cis-acting elements .
Annu .
Rev .
Immunol .
14:459 .
6 .
Sikes , M. L. , C. C. Suarez , and E. M. Oltz .
1999 .
Regulation of V ( D ) J recombination by transcriptional promoters .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
19:2773 .
7 .
Whitehurst , C. E. , S. Chattopadhyay , and J. Chen .
1999 .
Control of V ( D ) J recombinational accessibility of the DB1 gene segment at the TCRB locus by a germline promoter .
Immunity 10:313 .
8 .
Glimcher , L. H. , and H. Singh .
1999 .
Transcription factors in lymphocyte development T and B cells get together .
Cell 96:13 .
9 .
McMurry , M. T. , and M. S. Krangel .
2000 .
A role for histone acetylation in the developmental regulation of VDJ recombination .
Science 287:495 .
10 .
Kwon , J. , K. B. Morshead , J. R. Guyon , R. E. Kingston , and M. A. Octtinger .
2000 .
Histone acetylation and hSWI/SNF remodeling act in concert to stimulate V ( D ) J cleavage of nucleosomal DNA .
Mol .
Cell 6:1037 .
11 .
Yamagami , T. , E. ten Boekel , C. Schaniel , J. Andersson , A. Rolink , and F. Melchers .
1999 .
Four of five RAG-expressing JC « ~'~ small pre-BII cells have 12 .
13 .
14 .
15 .
16 .
17 .
18 .
19 .
20 .
21 .
22 .
23 .
24 .
25 .
26 .
27 .
269 no L chain gene rearrangements : detection by high-efficiency single cell PCR .
Immunity 11:309 .
Scherer , D. C. , J .
A. Brockman , H. H. Bendall , G. M. Zhang , D. W. Ballard , and E. M. Oltz .
1996 .
Corepression of RelA and c-rel inhibits immunoglobulin x gene transcription and rearrangement in precursor B lymphocytes .
Immunity 5:563 .
Brass , A. L. , A. Q. Zhu , and H. Singh .
1999 .
Assembly requirements of PU.1-Pip ( IRF-4 ) activator complexes : inhibiting function in vivo using fused dimers .
EMBO J .
18:977 .
Hagman , J. , C. M. Rudin , D. Haasch , D. Chaplin , and U. Storb .
1990 .
A novel enhancer in the immunoglobulin A locus is duplicated and functionally independent of NF-kB .
Genes Dev .
4:978 .
Klug , C. A. , S. J. Gerety , P. C. Shah , Y. Y. Chen , N. R. Rice , N. Rosenberg , and H. Singh .
1994 .
The v-abl tyrosine kinase negatively regulates NF-B/Rel factors and blocks x gene transcription in pre-B lymphocytes .
Genes Dev .
8:678 .
Chen , Y. Y. , L. C. Wang , M. S. Huang , and N. Rosenberg .
1994 .
An active v-abl protein tyrosine kinase blocks immunoglobulin light-chain gene rearrangement .
Genes Dev .
8:688 .
Schlissel , M. S. 1998 .
Structure of nonhairpin coding-end DNA breaks in cells undergoing V ( D ) J recombination .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
18:2029 .
Inoue , J. , L. D. Kerr , L. J. Ransone , E. Bengal , T. Hunter , and I. M. Verma .
1991. c-rel activates but v-rel suppresses transcription from B sites .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 88:3715 .
Reilly , E. B. , B. Blomberg , T. Imanishi-Kari , S. Tonegawa , S. , and H. N. Eisen .
1984 .
Restricted association of V and J-C gene segments for mouse A chains .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 81:2484 .
Hempel , W. M. , P. Stanhope-Baker , N. Mathieu , F. Huang , M. S. Schlissel , and P. Ferrier .
1998 .
Enhancer control of V ( D ) J recombination at the TCRB locus : differential effects on DNA cleavage and joining .
Genes Dev .
12:2305 .
Lauzurica , P. , X. P. Zhong , M. S. Krangel , and J. L. Roberts .
1997 .
Regulation of T cell receptor 8 gene rearrangement by CBF/PEBP2 .
J. Exp .
Med .
185:1193 .
Bendall , H. H. , D. C. Scherer , C. R. Edson , D. W. Ballard , and E. M. Oltz .
1997 .
Transcription factor NF-KB regulates inducible Oct-2 gene expression in precursor B lymphocytes .
J. Biol .
Chem .
272:28826 .
Bailey , S. N. , and N. Rosenberg .
1997 .
Assessing the pathogenic potential of the V ( D ) J recombinase by interlocus immunoglobulin light-chain gene rearrangement .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
17:887 .
Engel , H. , A. Rolink , and S. Weiss .
1999 .
B cells are programmed to activate x and A for rearrangement at consecutive developmental stages .
Eur .
J. Immunol .
29:2167 .
Sen , R. , and D. Baltimore .
1986 .
Inducibility of x immunoglobulin enhancer-binding protein NF-xB by a posttranslational mechanism .
Cell 47:921 .
Xu , Y. , L. Davidson , F. W. Alt , and D. Baltimore .
1996 .
Deletion of the Igx light chain intronic enhancer/matrix attachment region impairs but does not abolish rearrangement .
Immunity 4:377 .
Gorman , J. R. , N. van der Stoep , R. Monroe , M. Cogne , L. Davidson , and F. W. Alt .
1996 .
The Igx enhancer influences the ratio of Ig versus IgA B lymphocytes .
Immunity 5:241 .
6107 '0t 4epy uo 1san8 4q [ 810 fountwrut [ 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor
