Flexible , Intuitive , and Luminex .
C4 - « gf\ _ } Affordable Cytometry , warmmore complexity simplified .
Guava® easyCyte `` Flow Cytometers .
# s mJournal of Constitutive Expression of MHC Class II P Itmnmunolo gy Genes in Melanoma Cell Lines Results from the Transcription of Class II Transactivator Abnormally Initiated from Its B Cell-Specific This information is current as Promoter of May 10 , 2019 .
Virginie Deffrennes , Jocelyn Vedrenne , Marie-Claude Stolzenberg , Janet Piskurich , Giovanna Barbieri , Jenny P. Ting , Dominique Charron and Catherine Alcaide-Loridan J Immunol 2001 ; 167:98-106 ; ; doi : 10.4049/jimmunol.167.1.98 http : //www .jimmunol.org/content/167/1/98 References _ This article cites 54 articles , 21 of which you can access for free at : http : //www .jimmunol.org/content/167/1/98.full # ref-list-1 Why The JT ?
Submit online .
« Rapid Reviews !
30 days* from submission to initial decision * No Triage !
Every submission reviewed by practicing scientists * Fast Publication !
4 weeks from acceptance to publication *average Subscription _- Information about subscribing to The Journal of Immunology is online at : http : //jimmunol.org/subscription Permissions _ Submit copyright permission requests at : http : //www.aai.org/About/Publications/Jl/copyright.html Email Alerts _ Receive free email-alerts when new articles cite this article .
Sign up at : http : //jimmunol.org/alerts The Journal of Immunology is published twice each month by The American Association of Immunologists , Inc. , 1451 Rockville Pike , Suite 650 , Rockville , MD 20852 Copyright © 2001 by The American Association of Immunologists All rights reserved .
Print ISSN : 0022-1767 Online ISSN : 1550-6606 .
6107 '0t 4epy uo 1san8 4q [ 810 fountwrut [ 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor Constitutive Expression of MHC Class II Genes in Melanoma Cell Lines Results from the Transcription of Class II Transactivator Abnormally Initiated from Its B Cell-Specific Promoter ' Virginie Deffrennes , * Jocelyn Vedrenne , * Marie-Claude Stolzenberg , `` Janet Piskurich , * Giovanna Barbieri , ** Jenny P. Ting , `` Dominique Charron , * and Catherine Alcaide-Loridan** In melanoma cell lines , two different patterns of MHC class II expression have been described , either an IFN y-inducible expression of HLA-DR and HLA-DP , with a faint or null expression of HLA-DQ , resembling that described for melanocytes , or a constitutive expression , i.e .
, IFN-y independent , of all three HLA-D isotypes .
As this latter phenotype has been associated with a more rapid progression of melanoma tumors , we have analyzed in different melanoma cell lines the molecular mechanisms leading to this abnormal pattern of MHC class II expression .
In agreement with the evidence of a coordinate transcription of the HLA-D genes in these cell lines , we have shown the constitutive expression of CITA ( class II transactivator ) transcripts , CIITA being known as the master switch of MHC class II expression .
Unexpectedly , these transcripts initiate from promoter III of the CHTA gene , a promoter that is mainly used constitutively in B lymphocytes .
This expression was further shown to occur through factor ( s ) acting on the enhancer located upstream of CITA promoter III , which was previously described in epithelioid cells as an IFN-y-response sequence .
The hypothesis of a general abnormality of the IFN-y transduction pathway was dismissed .
Constitutive transcription of CIZTA from promoter III having been observed in unrelated melanoma cell lines , we propose the hypothesis that this phenomenon might not be a random event , but could be linked to the neoplasic state of the melanoma cells .
The Journal of Immunology , 2001 , 167 : 98-106. elanoma arise from melanocytes that are pigment-M producing cells derived from the neural crest , and represent the most lethal type of cutaneous cancers .
As chemotherapy is poorly efficient on this type of cancers ( 1 ) , mainly on distant metastasis , immunotherapy has been consid-ered .
With the evidence of specific tumor Ags presented by MHC class I molecules ( reviewed in Ref .
2 ) , vaccination of patients with tumoral peptides ( 3 , 4 ) was undertaken .
This was demonstrated to be efficient , even though moderated by results showing that these treatments might induce immune escape of the tumors through MHC class I loss of expression ( 5 ) or mutations in the vaccinated tumor Ag ( 4 ) .
*Unité Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale , Unité 396 , Centre de Recherches Biomédicales des Cordeliers , Paris , France ; *Unité Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale , Unité 429 , Hopital Necker , Paris , France ; *Department of Basic Sciences , Mercer University Medical School , Macon , GA 31207 ; and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center , Department of Microbiology and Immunology , University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , NC 27599 Received for publication October 31 , 2000 .
Accepted for publication April 18 , 2001 .
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges .
This article must therefore be hereby marked adverfisement in accordance with 18 U.S.C .
Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . '
This work was supported in part by the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale , Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale ( Progrés ) , and the Association pour la Recherche sur le Cancer .
V.D .
was the recipient of a grant from the Association pour la Recherche sur le Cancer , and J.V .
was supported by the Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer et la Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale .
* Current address : Istituto di Biologia dello Svillupo , Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche ( CNR ) , 152 via Ugo La Malfa , Palermo , Italy .
3 Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. Catherine Alcaide-Loridan .
Unité d'Immunogénétique Humaine , Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale , Unité 396 , Centre de Recherches Biomédicales des Cordeliers , 15 rue de I'Ecole de Médecine , 75270 Paris cedex 06 , France .
E-mail address : Catherine .
Alcaide @ bhdc.jussicu.fr Copyright © 2001 by The American Association of Immunologists More recently , attention has focused on the role of CD4 * lymphocytes in tumor elimination ( see Ref .
6 for a review ) with the evidence of tumor Ag-specific CD4 * lymphocytes ( 7 , 8 ) .
However , even though both CD4 * and CD8 * cells infiltrate the melanoma tumors ( 9 ) , these cancer cells often acquire the capacity to escape immune surveillance through lymphocyte anergy via mechanisms that are not yet unraveled ( 10 ) .
In addition , melanoma cells often display a constitutive expression of MHC class II molecules ( 11 , 12 ) , which is usually restricted to professional APC ( 13 ) .
Although MHC class II presentation of tumor Ags by melanoma cells has been described ( 14 ) , MHC class II expression was shown to be associated with a better progression of primary melanoma and a higher metastatic dissemination ( 15 ) .
MHC class II constitutive expression in melanomas is considered nowadays as a progression marker ( 16 , 17 ) .
Therefore , it was proposed that MHC class II-expressing tumors might mimic an APC and induce lymphocyte anergy by the lack of accessory signals ( 18 ) .
Within the hypothesis of a role in the immune escape and tolerance induction , mechanisms leading to the constitutive expression of MHC class II Ags in melanoma cells must be investigated .
MHC class II molecules are represented by three isotypes , HLA-DR , HLA-DQ , and HLA-DP , consisting of a heterodimer of transmembrane glycoprotein a and 3 encoded by distinct genes .
As mentioned above , constitutive expression of MHC class II molecules is restricted to professional APC such as dendritic cells , macrophages , and B lymphocytes .
However , expression of MHC class II molecules is inducible by various cytokines , of which the most potent is IFN-y in many of cells such as fibroblasts , epithelial cells ( see Ref .
13 for a review ) , or melanocytes ( 19 ) .
In addition to a tissue-specific expression , MHC class II molecules are subject to a differential expression depending on cell activation with T lymphocytes or differentiation in 0022-1767/01/ $ 02.00 6107 '0t 4epy uo 1san8 4q [ 810 fountwrut [ 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor The Journal of Immunology plasmocytes ( 13 ) .
Defects in MHC class II molecule expression are responsible for a severe immunodeficiency syndrome ( 20 ) , while aberrant expression of MHC class II in inappropriate tissues can lead to autoimmune diseases ( 21 ) .
Therefore , expression of MHC class II molecules requires a tight control of regulation .
The genes coding the MHC class II isotypes , in addition to the molecules involved in Ag presentation such as HLA-DM or the invariant chain ( I ) , `` are usually coordinately regulated at the transcriptional level ( reviewed in Ref .
22 ) .
Their promoters contain conserved motifs , the W , X1 , X2 , and Y boxes .
The X1 box binds regulatory factor binding to X box ( RFX ) , a heterotrimer composed of RFXANK ( 23 ) , RFX -associated protein ( 24 ) , and RFX5 ( 25 ) .
The X2 and Y boxes are binding sites , respectively , for a homodimer identified as CREB ( 26 ) , and the nuclear factor binding to Y box heterotrimer ( 27 ) .
However , these ubiquitously expressed factors are not sufficient for the transcriptional activation of the MHC class II genes and their proper tissue-specific expression .
The class II transactivator ( CIITA ) ( 28 ) is a non-DNA-bind-ing protein .
Through its interaction with RFX5 , RFXANK , CREB , two subunits of the nuclear factor binding to Y box complex , and the RNA polymerase transcription machinery , CIITA creates the scaffold required for a correct conformation of the MHC class II gene promoters and their transcriptional activation ( 29 ) .
In addition , CIITA confers the tissue-specific expression of MHC class II molecules , with a constitutive expression in B lymphocytes ( 28 ) and dendritic cells , and an IFN-y-responsive transcription in other cell lines ( 30 ) .
In addition to the tissue-specific expression of CIITA , it was demonstrated that differentiation can regulate CITA expression , with the silencing of CITA transcription in plasmocytes ( 31 ) , and that different cytokines can regulate its expression ( 22 ) .
The role of CIITA as a master switch of MHC class II genes has led to the analysis of its transcription .
The CITA gene is controlled by four different promoters located within a 13-kb DNA region ( 32 ) .
Promoter II has been described only in human cells , even though its function remains yet unknown .
Promoters I and III drive , respectively , the constitutive expression of CITA in dendritic cells and in B lymphocytes ( 32-34 ) , while the promoter IV principally controls the IFN-y-stimulated transcription of CHTA .
These promoters direct the transcription of four different first exons connected to a common second exon .
Both the second common exon and the first alternative exons expressed from promoters I and III contain putative translation initiation codons ( 32 ) .
Even though the second common exon contains a translation initiation codon , the CIITA proteins transcribed from promoters I and III might use upstream ATG located in the alternative first exons .
The IFN-y response of the CIITA gene is mediated by the phosphor-ylation of STAT1 , which promotes the transcription of IFN regulatory factor-1 ( IRF-1 ) and the binding of both IRF-1 and STAT-1 in association with USF-1 on proximal promoter IV ( 35 , 36 ) .
Transcripts can also initiate in IFN-responsive cells from promoter III following a treatment with the cytokine .
This phenomenon occurs through the presence of a 1068-bp enhancer element located ~5 kb upstream promoter III ( 34 ) , to which we will refer as the 1-kb enhancer element .
Through this 1-kb enhancer element , the response to IFN-y induction is STAT-1 dependent , but IRF-1 independent ( 36 ) .
* Abbreviations used in this paper : Ti , invariant chain ; CTA , class II transactivator ; CSPD , disodium 3- ( 4-methoxyspiro { 1,2-dioxetane-3,2 ' - ( 5'-chlera ) tricyclo [ 3.3.1.1* `` ] decan } -4-y ) phenyl ; Dig , digoxigenin ; GBP-1 , guanylate-binding protein 1 ; IRF-1 , IFN regulatory factor-1 ; RFX , regulatory factor binding to X box ; RLUs , relative light units .
99 The aim of our study is to understand the molecular mechanisms leading to the constitutive expression of MHC class II genes in melanoma .
We will show in this work that this abnormal pattern of expression is due to the constitutive transcription of CHTA from promoter III , and is caused by trans-acting factor ( s ) acting on the 1-kb enhancer element upstream this promoter .
Materials and Methods Cell culture The HT144 ( ATCC : HTB-63 ) , 42/95 , M74 , and A375 ( ATCC : CRL1619 ) human melanoma cell lines were kindly provided by E. Tartour ( Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale ( INSERM ) Unité 255 , Curie Institute , Paris , France ) .
BUA , an SV40-established human fibroblast cell line , and COM , an EBV-established human B lymphocyte cell line , were used as controls for the IFN-y-inducible or constitutive expression of CIITA and MHC class II molecules , respectively , and were kindly provided by B. Lisowska-Grospierre ( INSERM Unité 429-Hépital Necker ) .
All these cell lines were grown in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10 % heat-inactivated FCS , antibiotics , and 2 mM glutamine .
Flow cytometric analysis Indirect immunofluorescence assays were performed with a FACScan ( BD Biosciences , Mountain View , CA ) using a CellQuest program on cells treated for 72 h with 250 U/ml rIFN-y ( PeproTech , Rocky Hill , NJ ) .
Before the addition of the primary Ab , the melanoma and BUA cell lines were preincubated with pure heat-inactivated FCS to block mAb-unspecific binding .
The primary mAbs were L243 ( 37 ) , B7/21 ( 38 ) , and L2 ( 39 ) , respectively , directed against membrane HLA-DR , DP , and DQ Ags .
Human membrane MHC class I Ags were detected with the W6/32 mAb ( Serotec , Oxford , U.K. ) .
Cell labeling was then performed with the anti-mouse Ig labeled with FITC from Biosys ( Compiegne , France ) .
Cell transfections , luciferase constructs , and assays Melanoma cell lines were plated at a density of 4 X 10° cells/well in six-well plates .
Twenty-four hours later , semiconfluent cells were cotransfected with a 5:1 molar ratio of a luciferase construct and pON1 plasmid .
pON1 encodes the B-galactosidase gene placed under the control of the Rous sarcoma virus promoter ( 40 ) , and allows the monitoring of transfection efficiency .
The transfection of the melanoma cell lines was performed with the Effecten Reagent ( Qiagen , Chatsworth , CA ) following the instructions of the manufacturer .
Twenty hours later , transfected cells were treated with IFN-y for 24 h. Luciferase and B-galactosidase activities were assayed using the Luciferase Assay System and the B-galactosidase Enzyme Assay System kits from Promega ( Madison , WI ) , according to the manufacturer 's instructions .
Luciferase activity was measured with a BioOrbit lumino-meter .
Relative light units per second ( RLUs_ ' ) were further divided by the B-galactosidase activities ( expressed as A420 ) to correct for transfection efficiency .
The pGL3-control , containing an SV40 promoter upstream of the luciferase gene , and the promoterless pGL3-basic and pGL2-basic constructs were from Promega .
The pGL3-DRA , pGL3-DQA , and pGL3-DPA plasmids contain 250-bp promoter fragments of the HLA-D genes , which include the conserved W , X1 , X2 , and Y boxes ( 41 ) .
The human CHITAp-D2 vector ( 42 ) containing the minimal promoter IV of CHTA cloned in the pGL2-basic vector was kindly provided by E. Benveniste ( University of Alabama , Birmingham , AL ) .
The CHITA-1783-luc construct contains 1783 bp of promoter III of CHTA cloned in the pGL3-basic vector ( 33 ) .
The pHCIITA.Luc , pHIDEL2.CITA.Luc , pHIDEL3.CIHITA.Luc , and pHIDELA4 .
constructs were described previously ( 34 , 36 ) ( see Fig .
9 as well ) .
The construct corresponds to the plIIDEL2 .
CIITA.Luc plasmid mutagenized to replace the consensus Brm-2/N-Oct3 binding site ( CATGCAAAATG ) located in the enhancer with the CATG CAGCATG sequence demonstrated to inactivate Bm-2 binding ( 43 ) .
The mutagenesis was performed , following the instructions of the manufacturer with the Quick Change site-directed mutagenesis kit from Stratagene ( La Jolla , CA ) , using the following primer ( 5-TCTAGACACCTACCCCATGCAG CATGCAGTGCTGAGTGCT-3 `` ) .
A deletion in the same site removing the AAAAT half of the palindrome was created in the pIIDEL2.Bm-Del.Luec construct , following the same procedure with the primer GACACCTACCCCATGCTGCAGTGCTGAGTGCTITTGGGTACT-3 ' .
The pGL3-SV40.Enh construct was generated through the ligation of the Secl-linearized pGL3-control vector ( Promega ) and a 2132-bp PCR product containing the enhancer upstream promoter III of the CHTA gene .
The construct was cotransfected in the HT144 cell line , using Effecten as described above , with a Renilla luciferase reporter construct ( pRL-TK vector from Promega ) to control for transfection efficiency ( molar ratio 1:5 6107 '0t 4epy uo 1san8 4q [ 810 fountwrut [ 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor 100 ABNORMAL TRANSCRIPTION OF CIITA IN MELANOMA CELL LINES Renilla/Firefly vectors ) .
The luciferase activities were measured with the Dual Luciferase Assay System from Promega .
RT-PCR analysis Total RNA was isolated from subconfluent cultures with TRIzol ( Life Technologies ) following the instructions of the manufacturer .
cDNA preparation was performed on 1 ug total RNA with poly ( dT ) and 2.5 U Om-niscript reverse transcriptase from Qiagen .
PCR was performed with the Taq polymerase from Qiagen following the instructions of the manufacturer .
Quantification of cDNA concentration was further assessed with GAPDH-specific primers through a 16-cycle PCR .
The oligonucleotide sequences and amplification conditions are summarized in Table I .
For all these primer sets , 1-min denaturation , annealing , and extension were applied during the PCR and performed in a MG apparatus .
Semiquantitative PCR of promoter-specific CITA transcripts was performed by labeling of cDNA products during the PCR amplification using digoxigenin ( Dig ) -dUTP ( Roche , Meyland , France ) .
PCR products were transferred on membrane Hybond N* ( Amersham , Arlington Heights , IL ) and revealed with ready-to-use CSPD ( Roche ) .
The sense primers , pH-CHITA ( GGAATTCCAGACTCCGGGAGCTGCTGC ) and pIV- CHITA ( CCCAGAGCTGGCGGGAGGGA ) , were both used in association with the antisense CHITA-P-AS primer ( TGCTGAACTGGTCGCAGTTGATGG ) .
For plll-initiated transcripts , 25-cycle amplification was performed at annealing temperatures of 67°C .
For pIV-initiated transcripts , 27 cycles were applied , with a 60°C annealing temperature .
RACE-PCR The RACE-PCR was performed with the 5 `` RACE system from Life Technologies ( Grand Island , NY ) according to the manufacturer 's instructions .
The cDNA preparation was performed with the CIITA-P-AS oligonucleotide described above , which hybridizes to all forms of CITA transcripts .
The antisense oligonucleotide specific for promoter III-initiated transcripts ( CTGACAGGTAGGACCCAGC ) was used in association with the anchored primer from the kit , with a 56°C annealing temperature and a 35-cycle amplification .
The RACE-PCR products ( 200 pb ) were directly sub-cloned in the PCR2.1 vector ( TA-cloning kit from Invitrogen , San Diego , CA ) , and the inserts were sequenced using the Big Dye Terminator cycle-sequencing kit ( Perkin Elmer Applied Biosystems , Foster City , CA ) using an ABI 377 automatic sequencer ( Perkin-Elmer , Norwalk , CT ) .
Results Coordinated HLA-D isotype expression at the cell surface of HLA-DR¢ melanoma cell lines Cell surface expression of HLA-DR molecules was analyzed on a panel of 20 different melanoma cell lines by cytofluorometry .
As previously described by others ( 11 , 12 ) , two main phenotypes were obtained , with either no expression of HLA-DR in the absence of IFN-y treatment ( HLA-DR~ cells ) , or constitutive expression of these molecules ( HLA-DR * cells ) .
These phenotypes are exemplified in Fig .
1 for the 42/95 and HT144 cell lines .
This study was further pursued , on four melanoma cell lines considered as prototypes in our study , with the analysis of all three HLA-D isotype expression , in the presence or the absence of IFN-y ( Table II ) .
In two HLA-DR~ cell lines , 42/95 and M74 , none of the three isotypes was expressed in a constitutive manner .
However , IFN-y treatment induced the cell surface expression of HLA-DR and HLA-DP , with a null or very weak expression of HLA-DQ .
Therefore , these melanoma cell lines have a pattern of MHC class II expression similar to fibroblast cell lines ( BUA , Table II ) or to epidermal melanocytes ( 19 ) .
With the HLA-DR* cell lines , HT144 and A375 , all three isotypes were expressed constitutively , with a further stimulation of expression following the IFN-y treat-ment .
Therefore , the deregulation of HLA-DR molecule expression in these melanoma cell lines is also affecting HLA-DP and HLA-DQ .
However , constitutive and IFN-induced MHC class I expression did not differ significantly when HLA-DR~ and HLA-DR * cell lines were compared , thereby suggesting that the phenomenon is specific for the MHC class II molecules .
Constitutive expression of the HLA-D transcripts in the HLA-DR melanoma cell lines The expression of the HLA-D transcripts was analyzed by RT-PCR experiments in the four melanoma cell lines .
In the absence of a melanocyte cell line , we used as a control the BUA fibroblast cell line .
As displayed on Fig .
2 , constitutive expression of all the Table I. Sequence , annealing temperatures , and amplification cycles applied for each set of primers used in the RT-PCR experiments `` Annealing Temperature No .
of Amplified cDNA Primer Set ( °C ) Cycles HLA-DRA S TGGGAGTTTGATGTCCCAAG 58 25 AS - AACATCATCACCTCCATGTG HLA-DRB S CAGCATTRAAGTCAGGTGGTTCC 65 28 AS - CTCAGCATCTTGCTCTGTGCAG HLA-DQA S GTGCTGCAGGTGTAAACTTGTACCAG 58 25 AS - CACGGATCCGGTAGCAGCGGTAGAGTTG HLA-DQB S CGAGTACTGGAAYAGCCAGAAGG 59 25 AS - GGAGTCATTTCCAGCATCACCAGG HLA-DPA S GGAGACCGTCTGGCATCTGGA 58 25 AS - CTCTCAGCGACACCCTCAGT HLA-DPB S GGGACACAGCGCTTCCTGGAG 59 25 AS - CAAGCAGGTTGTGGTGCTGCA HLA-DMB S GGCTGACTGTTACTTCACCA 54 33 AS - CCTTCTCACTTGGAGTGGA Ii S ATCTTTACAGAGCAGAGCAT 65 28 AS - CCAGATCCTGCTTGGTCAC GAPDH S GTCGTATTGGGCGCCTGGTCAC 62 16 AS - CACGACGTACTCAGCGCCAGCA CHTA S TTTCTGGGCACCCGCCTCAC 62 33 AS - CTGGGGGAAGGTGGCTGAGA IRF-1 S CTTCCCTCTTCCACTCGGAGTC 63 25 AS - CTGGTCTTTCACCTCCTCGATATCT * S , Sense ; AS , antisense .
6107 '0t 4epy uo 1san8 4q [ 810 fountwrut [ 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor The Journal of Immunology : 4PM , A a B Number of events Fluorescence intensity FIGURE 1 .
Cell surface expression of the HLA-DR molecules in the 42/95 and HT144 melanoma cell lines examined by indirect immunoflu-orescence .
The cells were either treated with 250 U/ml IFN-y for 48 h or untreated as indicated on the figure ( light histograms ) .
The dark histogram corresponds to the isotypic control .
The L243 mAb was used to detect the expression of HLA-DR molecules by cytofluorometry .
HLA-D mRNAs , in addition to Ii , was observed in the HT144 and A375 cell lines .
In contrast , with the BUA and 42/95 cells , no expression of these genes was observed in the absence of IFN-y treatment , except HLA-DPB and HLA-DQB transcripts detected in the untreated BUA cell line .
The M74 cell line was more puzzling , as several genes displayed a constitutive expression ( HLA-DRB , HLA-DQB , HLA-DMB , HLA-DPA , and HLA-DPB ) , even though HLA-DRA , HLA-DQA , and Ii mRNAs were not detected , even with a 30-cycle amplification RT-PCR procedure ( data not shown ) .
Therefore , the abnormal constitutive cell surface expression of the HLA-D molecules in the HLA-DR * melanoma cell lines is in good agreement with a transcriptional deregulation of their encoding genes .
Luciferase gene reporter assays were next performed with HLA-DRA , HLA-DPA , and HLA-DQA promoter constructs in the HT144 and 42/95 cell lines .
As depicted in Fig .
3 , in the absence of IFN-y treatment , luciferase activities driven by the HLA-D gene promoters were systematically greater ( 50- to 180-fold , depending on the promoter ) in the HLA-DR * HT144 cell line than in the HLA-DR~ 42/95 cells .
Therefore , these data show that the deregulation of the HLA-D molecules is caused by a factor activating the coordinate transcription of the HLA-D genes .
Interestingly , the IFN-y stimulation of expression of the HLA-D promoter luciferase constructs in the HT144 cell line was very low .
As an example , with the HLA-DRA promoter construct , stimulation following the IFN-y treatment in the HT144 cell line was 1.4-fold , while it was 6-fold with the 42/95 cell line or 16-fold in the BUA cells ( data not shown ) .
The weak IFN-y response correlates with the poor response to the cytokine previously observed in the analysis of most HLA-D transcripts in the HT144 cell line ( Fig .
2 ) .
101 HLA-DR 42195 | M74 BUA | A375 IFNy 1004 [ O- c+ - __+ - __+ - __+ or » .
| ees ees tar `` ac pa cee Meeps oy ar e a co _| Wilion ) ( =+ == ) fne C ss ) __ - _C vce |E a rrr j nos | liken : tikes | -- ] HLA-DR+ HT144 GAPDH | ean emm emsems cos cs : can am cs cus FIGURE 2 .
RT-PCR analysis of HLA-D gene transcription in the four melanoma cell lines and in the BUA cell line .
The number of amplification cycles is given for each primer set in Table I. cDNAs either from cells treated for 48 h with 250 U/ml IFN-y ( + ) or from untreated cells ( - ) and the PCR products were analyzed on ethidium bromide-stained agarose gels .
To assess that equal amounts of cDNA were used , a 16-cycle amplification was performed on the cDNAs with GAPDH primers , and the corresponding Dig-labeled PCR products were stained with CSPD .
CHTA is constitutively transcribed in both HLA-DR¢* melanoma cell lines As CHITA is the master switch of the tissue-specific expression pattern of the HLA-D molecules and of the accessory proteins implicated in Ag processing , we have next analyzed the expression of the CHTA mRNA in the four melanoma cell lines by RT-PCR ( Fig .
4 ) .
As previously described by others for fibroblast or melanoma cell lines ( 32 ) , in the BUA and 42/95 cell lines , CIFTA mRNA was not detected unless a 6-h IFN-y treatment was applied , even though a 33-cycle PCR was applied on the cDNAs .
In the HLA-DR~ M74 cell line , a very faint band was detected in the untreated cells .
In contrast , in both HLA-DR * cell lines , HT144 and A375 , CIHTA transcripts were observed even in the absence of the cytokine .
CHTA transcription is inducible by IFN-y in all these cell lines when using lower number of amplification cycles ( see be-low ) .
Therefore , the expression pattern of CITA transcript was in agreement with the MHC class II phenotype , thereby indicating that the HLA-DR * phenotype is highly likely caused by the abnormal constitutive expression of CIITA .
Analysis of the IFN-y transduction pathway in HT144 Based on data cited above regarding the weak IFN-y response observed in the HT144 cell line concerning the HLA-D genes , we Table II .
Summary of the data obtained by flow cytometry on the melanoma cell lines and on control cells , the B lymphocyte COM , and the fibroblast BUA cell lines `` HLA-DR HLA-DP HLA-DQ HLA-A.B.C Cell line UNT IFN-y UNT IFN-y UNT IFN-y UNT IFN-y 42195 - ++ - + - - ++ +++ M74 - +++ - ++ - - ++ +++ BUA - +++ - ++ - - ++ +++ COM ++++ ND ++++ ND ++++ ND ++++ ND A375 ++ +++ + ++ + ++ ++ +++ HT144 +++ ++++ ++ +++ ++ +++ +++ ++++ `` Cells were either untreated ( UNT ) or treated for 72 h with IFN-y , and indirect immunofluorescence analysis was performed with the L243 , B7/21 , L2 , and W6/32 mAbs directed , respectively , against HLA-DR , HLA-DP , HLA-DQ , or HLA-A , B , C .
The + and - symbols correspond to the following fluorescence means : - , 1-3 ; + , > 3-20 ; ++ , > 20-100 ; +++ , > 100-400 ; ++++ , > 400 .
6107 '0t 4epy uo 1san8 4q [ 810 fountwrut [ 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor 102 ABNORMAL TRANSCRIPTION OF CIITA IN MELANOMA CELL LINES hypothesized that the constitutive expression of CIITA might result from a permanent activation of the IFN-y transduction pathway in this cell line , and might therefore lead to a poor additional response to the cytokine .
Two IFN-y-response genes were then analyzed for their transcription in the melanoma cell lines .
IRF-I is an early response gene induced by the binding of the phosphor-ylated STAT-1 heterodimer , and guanylate-binding protein 1 ( GBP-1 ) transcription is occurring through IREF-1 activation ( 44 ) .
No major difference was detected between the HLA-DR~ and HLA-DR * cell lines concerning the constitutive expression levels of IRF-1 ( Fig .
5 ) or GBP-1 ( data not shown ) transcripts .
The main difference between the cell lines is the kinetics of IFN-y response with IRF-1 , whose transcript accumulation is reduced in the A375 and 42/95 cell lines after a 48-h treatment compared with the other melanoma cell lines .
Therefore , these data indicate that the general signal transduction mediated by the cytokine is similar in both HLA-DR~ and HLA-DR * melanoma cell lines .
Comparable basal level of CHTA transcription initiated from promoter IV in both melanoma cell lines In cells such as fibroblasts or HLA-DR~ melanoma , the IFN-y-induced transcription of CITA is mainly initiated from promoter IV ( 32 ) .
By semiquantitative RT-PCR , we have analyzed the initiation of CHTA transcripts from promoter IV in the melanoma cell lines , compared with the fibroblast BUA cell line .
As the sequence of exon 1 differs depending on the promoter used , we chose a sense primer specific of exon 1 transcribed from promoter IV and an antisense primer hybridizing to the exon 2 common to all mRNA initiated from the different CITA promoters .
As depicted in Fig .
6 , in the absence of IFN-y treatment , transcription initiated from promoter IV is not observed in the melanoma and in the fibroblast cell lines .
However , with the HT144 and A375 cells , in the absence of IFN-y treatment , a very faint band was detected when the film was overexposed .
This barely detectable band did not reflect the level of transcription obtained in the preceding experiment , and these data suggested that the HLA-DR * phenotype was not explained by a constitutive expression from promoter IV of CHTA .
These results were confirmed by luciferase gene reporter assays performed with a CITA promoter IV construct transfected in the HT144 , A375 , and 42/95 melanoma and the fibroblast BUA cell lines ( Fig .
7 ) .
In three independent experiments , we have never observed more than a 2-fold difference in the constitutive luciferase amounts in the HLA-DR * cells compared with the HLA-DR and BUA cell lines .
Concerning IFN-y induction of the CHTA promoter IV , the induction was slightly higher in the BUA cell line ( 10-fold ) , compared with the HT144 , A375 , and 42/95 cell lines ( ~8-fold ) .
In the HLA-DR~ M74 cell line , stimulation by IFN-y was ranging from 20- to 40-fold ( not shown ) with promoter IV constructs , which is in good agreement with the high induction of CHTA transcripts from promoter IV ( Fig .
6 ) .
These results further confirm the absence of deregulation of the IFN-y transduction pathway in the HLA-DR * cell lines and a normal usage of CHTA promoter IV in all these cell lines .
Constitutive transcription of CHTA in HT144 melanoma cell line mainly initiates from promoter III We had previously shown that the lack of constitutive expression of CHTA in epithelioid cells was due to an active suppression phenomenon of CITA promoter III ( 45 ) .
Therefore , we hypothesized that the suppression mechanism might be inactivated in the HLA-DR* cell lines , and that the constitutive transcription of CIHTA might be initiated from the promoter III of this gene .
RACE-PCR was then performed with an antisense primer hybridizing to the common exon 2 shared by all CHTA mRNA , and the product was further amplified using a primer specific for promoter TI-initiated transcripts .
In the HT144 cell line , a band was amplified in untreated cells , and its intensity increased in cells treated for 6 h with IFN-y ( data not shown ) .
This band presented the same sequence that was previously described on mRNA initiated from promoter III in B lymphocytes ( 28 , 32 ) .
We further confirmed this result by a 25-amplification cycle semiquantitative RT-PCR using a sense primer specific for promoter III-initiated transcript , and the COM B lymphocyte cell line as a positive control .
As expected , a high level of CITA mRNA was initiated from promoter III in COM ( Fig .
8 ) .
In the absence of IFN-y , the 42/95 cell line did not display any CZFTA transcript even in experiments using 33-cycle PCR amplification ( data not shown ) .
In contrast , in the HLA-DR * HT144 and A375 cell lines , CHTA product was observed in the absence of the cytokine .
In the M74 cell line , and in the BUA cell line , a faint band was detected , which is in agreement with the constitutive transcription of certain HLA-D transcripts that was observed previously ( Fig .
2 ) .
After IFN-y treatment , all cell lines displayed an increase of CHTA transcription from promoter III , in agreement with the presence of the IFN-responsive enhancer located upstream of promoter III ( 34 , 36 ) .
In conclusion , the constitutive expression of CITA in the HLA-DR * cell lines is due to an abnormal transcription initiated from promoter III that was described to be mainly used in B lymphocytes .
The initiation from promoter III of CHTA in HT144 requires the presence of the IFN-y-responsive enhancer located upstream promoter III To determine whether the deregulation of CHTA transcription was due to a trans-acting factor , luciferase reporter gene assays were performed with different promoter IIMV/enhancer constructs depicted in Fig .
9 .
With promoter III constructs alone ( either 545 bp or 1723 bp long ) , the difference between the 42/95 and HT144 cell lines did not exceed 1.5-fold in four independent experiments .
However , constructs containing the enhancer were driving a luciferase activity 7- to 9-fold higher in the HT144 cell line than in the 42/95 cells , these values representing an average of five independent experiments .
Therefore , our data show that the 1-kb enhancer , previously described as an IFN-responsive element in epithelioid cell lines , is the target for CITA constitutive expression in melanoma cell lines .
Interestingly , the properties of the enhancer in the HT144 cell line were lost when the SV40 promoter ( Fig .
10 , pGL3-SV40.Enh construct ) replaced the minimal promoter III of CIITA .
These data suggest that the factor ( s ) binding the enhancer additionally requires an interaction with the CITA promoter III , or with promoter III-binding factor ( s ) , for a complete activity .
Analysis of the Brn-2 transcription factor Brn-2/N-Oct3 has been described as a transcription factor involved in the tumorigenic potential of melanoma cells ( 46 ) .
In addition , it was shown that transfection of its encoding cDNA activates the transcription of MHC class II genes ( 47 ) .
As a perfect consensus binding site sequence ( CATGCAAAATG ) was found in the 1-kb enhancer ( 43 ) , Brn-2 represented a good candidate for the deregulation of CHTA transcription .
We first did not evidence any major difference in the amount of its mRNA or protein content when comparing 42/95 and HT144 cell lines ( data not shown ) .
However , description of posttranslational events modulating Brn-2 activity ( 48 ) led us to assay the effect of a deletion ( pIIIDEL2.Brn-Del.Luc construct ) or a mutation ( pIIIDEL2.Bra-Mut.Luc construct ) in the 6107 '0t 4epy uo 1san8 4q [ 810 fountwrut [ 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor The Journal of Immunology HLA-DRA-Luc HLA-DQA-Luc HLA-DPA-Luc pGL3-Control 0 50 100 150 200 Ratio RLU HT144 / RLU 42,95 FIGURE 3 .
- Activity of the HLA-DRA , HLA-DQA , and HLA-DPA gene promoters measured by luciferase assays in the HT144 and 42/95 cell lines .
After correction of transfection efficiency with B-galactosidase , the data were expressed as the ratio of RLUs~ ' obtained in the HT144 cell line divided by the RLUs ~ ' obtained in the 42/95 cells .
These data represent the average of four independent experiments .
Brn-2 palindromic site created in the plasmid .
As seen on Fig .
11 , however , even though the mutation provoked a slight decrease on CITA promoter III activity in both 42/95 and HT144 cell lines , we did not evidence any major effect of the Brn-2 binding site mutations neither in the 42/95 nor the HT144 melanoma cell lines .
In conclusion , whereas the 500-bp minimal promoter III is sufficient in B lymphocytes for constitutive expression of CHTA , the abnormal constitutive expression of CITA in HT144 requires the additional presence of the 1-kb enhancer element located upstream promoter III , and deregulation of CITA is mediated by a transacting factor in the melanoma cell line .
Discussion Our data demonstrate that the constitutive expression of MHC class II molecules in melanoma is correlated with a constitutive transcription of CITA .
This phenomenon was observed in two HLA-DR * cell lines established from unrelated patients , thereby suggesting that it might not originate from a random mutagenesis event , but might be linked to the neoplasic fate or differentiation state of this tumor type .
We have shown that the deregulation of CITA in melanoma cells occurs through the 1-kb enhancer upstream of promoter III , which was previously described as an IFN-responsive sequence ( 34 , 36 ) .
Our study has evidenced that the basal expression level of different IFN-responsive genes ( MHC class I , GBP-1 , or IRF-1 ) is similar in both HLA-DR * and HLA-DR~ melanoma cell lines ( Table II and Fig .
5 ) .
This demonstrates that the constitutive expression of CITA transcript is not caused by a general deregulation of the IFN transduction pathway .
However , A375 and HT144 cells are poorly inducible by this cytokine for the expression of the HLA-DR- HLA-DR+ azros | m74 | BUA | A375 | HT144 204 | ~ + [ - 4 |- 00+ [ + -+ [ IFNy ( hn ) ClITA cuase cam fan con cee ease | GAPDH FIGURE 4 .
RT-PCR analysis of CHTA transcript expression in the different melanoma cell lines and in the BUA cell line through a 33-cycle amplification procedure .
cDNAs were prepared from cells either untreated ( - ) or treated ( + ) with 250 U/ml IFN-y for 6 h. The amplification products were detected on ethidium bromide-stained gels .
To assess that equal amounts of cDNAs were used , a 16-cycle amplification was performed on the cDNAs with GAPDH-specific primers , and the Dig-labeled amplification products were stained with CSPD .
103 HLA-DR- HLA-DR+ 42095 | M74 BUA A375 [ o 6 as | 0 6 as | o 6 as |0o 6 4s [ 0 6 48 ( hn ) IRF-1 « -o « » « » fames « s | « -- « o « -- ] as cs casl « -- » -I cippL FIGURE 5 .
RT-PCR analysis of ZRF- ] transcript expression in the different melanoma cell lines and in the BUA cell line .
cDNA quantification with GAPDH-specific primers was performed on Dig-labeled amplified products .
HLA-D genes ( Fig .
2 ) .
Based on the above data , this observation might be explained by a quantitative effect of CIITA .
Indeed , it was shown that over a certain threshold of CITA , MHC class II expression reached a plateau ( 49 ) .
In the HT144 and A375 cell lines , CHTA mRNA levels are constitutively high ( Fig .
8 ) and allow an HLA-DR expression that is quite similar to that obtained with the induced BUA fibroblast cell line ( Table II ) .
When the HLA-DR * cell lines are induced by IFN-y , the CHTA transcription , initiated from both promoters III and IV ( Figs .
6 and 8 ) , does not result in a drastic increase of HLA-D transcription , as CIITA is already in high amounts before the addition of the cytokine .
Two results are interesting to point out concerning CITA transcription .
Even though luciferase expression driven by CITA promoter IV has a comparable basal expression level in HLA-DR * and HLA-DR~ melanoma cell lines ( Fig .
7 ) , a low amount of promoter IV-initiated transcripts was detected in the HLA-DR * melanoma cell lines by RT-PCR ( Fig .
6 ) .
This suggests that the enhancer/promoter III endogeneous sequences might frans-acti-vate the adjacent promoter IV .
The second point is the fact that the enhancer of CIITA did not function when associated with a het-erologous promoter , neither in the HT144 cell line concerning its constitutive expression level ( Fig .
10 ) , nor in a fibroblast cell line after an IFN-y treatment ( J. Vedrenne , unpublished data ) .
Luciferase assays reported in this work demonstrated that constitutive expression of CZTA transcription occurs via trans-acting factor ( s ) binding on the enhancer in the HLA-DR * melanoma cell lines .
As a putative candidate , Brn-2 , was dismissed in this study , a random mutagenesis of the enhancer will be required to identify the factor activating the constitutive expression of CITA .
This factor might either be a suppressor inactivated during the tumor-igenesis of the melanoma cells , or an activator gaining transcriptional activity or binding capacities to the CIITA enhancer .
As this factor interacts with the enhancer , our data show that it is different from the suppressor binding on promoter III of CITA evidenced in epithelial cells ( 45 ) .
Interestingly , the HLA-DR ~ M74 cell line is displaying a faint constitutive expression of certain HLA-D genes and a weak CITA promoter I-initiated transcription relative to the HLA-DR * cell lines .
This suggests that the factor interacting with the enhancer might have different levels of expression or activation depending on the melanoma cell line .
HLA-DR- HLA-DR+ 42/95 | M74 | BUA | A375 |HT144 0 6 48 | 0 6 48 |0 6 48 | 0 6 48 | 0 6 48 | IFNy ( hr ) - _| < 0 ] « -| -- @ ] CIITA « o « a « a fee cms o I -- -I -- - *** ** ] capo FIGURE 6 .
RT-PCR analysis of promoter IV-initiated CIHTA transcripts .
Amplification procedures ( 27- and 16-cycle ) were applied , respectively , for CHTA and GAPDH transcripts , and Dig-labeled products were stained with CSPD .
6107 '0t 4epy uo 1san8 4q [ 810 fountwrut [ 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor 104 ABNORMAL TRANSCRIPTION OF CIITA IN MELANOMA CELL LINES 14000 > , 12000 z 10000 H g so © e000 Ma `` 5 4000 3 - ' 2000 ‘ } o BUA 42195 HT144 A375 HLA-DR- HLA-DR+ FIGURE 7 .
Activity of the promoter IV of CHTA measured by luciferase assays .
Cells were either untreated ( ( @ ) or treated with 250 U/ml IFN-y for 24 h ( C ] ) .
Transfection efficiency was corrected with B-galactosidase , and these data represent the average of three independent experiments .
In many nonprofessional APC , cell surface expression of HLA-DQ is weak or null even when treated with IFN-y ( reviewed in Ref .
50 ) .
This phenomenon was observed as well with the HLA-DR ~ melanoma cell lines , in which the lack of expression of cell surface HLA-DQ molecules is obviously explained by the absence of HLA-DQA transcripts , even after a 48-h IFN-y treatment , although HLA-DQB transcript is induced by the cytokine ( Fig .
2 ) .
However , the HLA-DQA promoter is functional , as the transfection of the CIITA cDNA in the 42/95 cell line restores cell surface expression of the HLA-DQ molecules ( data not shown ) .
In addition , in this cell line , we showed that an exogenous HLA-DQA promoter is able to drive the expression of a luciferase reporter gene ( Fig .
3 ) .
This suggests the presence of a dose-limiting repres-sor acting on this promoter , whose effect would be bypassed in the luciferase assays by the high number of HLA-DQA promoter sequences carried by the plasmid constructs .
Indeed , a HLA-DQA-specific binding factor has been described as interacting with the Y box ( 51 ) , and might possess a repressing activity specific for the HLA-DQA promoter .
An alternative hypothesis was given by Otten et al .
( 49 ) , who demonstrated that cell surface HLA-DQ expression required a higher dose of CIITA relative to the expression of HLA-DR and HLA-DP .
As HLA-DR * cells , expressing CHTA constitutively , also express HLA-DQ , it could be proposed that a threshold of CIITA protein must be crossed to detect HLA-DQ expression .
However , this hypothesis is not fully satisfying with the melanoma cell lines .
Indeed , in the M74 cell line treated with IFN-y , cell surface HLA-DQ expression is not observed , and HLA-DQA transcripts are not detected .
However , in this cell line , the amount of CHTA transcripts initiated from promoter IV is even higher than in the HLA-DR * cell lines ( Fig .
6 ) .
This could indicate that the transcription of the HLA-DQA gene requires the presence of promoter Il-initiated CITA transcripts that are in low amounts in both HLA-DR ~ melanoma cell lines treated with IFN-y ( Fig .
8 ) .
With CHTA transcripts initiated from promoter III , the CIITA protein can be translated from two different ATGs ( 28 ) .
Therefore , it HLA-DR- 3 |__HLA-DR+ | m74 | BUA |Y | A375 |HT144 0 6 4s | o 6 as| 0 6 4s | 0 | 0 6 48 | 0 6 48 | IPNy ( hr ) CIITA < < < < < fem cms w ——-I-I-—- ———I GAPDH FIGURE 8 .
RT-PCR analysis of promoter IMW-initiated CITA transcripts .
Twenty-five-cycle and 16-cycle amplification procedures were applied , respectively , for CITA and GAPDH transcripts , and Dig-labeled products were stained with CSPD .
[ _ Enhancer | ( ___ pill ___ ) Exon _ ] .
pliIDEL4.CIITA.Luc ClITAA783.lue i- roduc % pHICIITA.Luc pHIDEL2.CIITA.Luc `` `` % mai ad pilIDEL3.CIITA.Luc « 6266-5198 pGL2-Basic pHDEL4.CIITA.Luc CIITA.1783.luc plHICHITA.Luc Im .
2 1 ] 10 20 3 40 § 0 60 7 8 9 10 Ratio RLU HT144 / RLU 42/95 FIGURE 9 .
Luciferase assays with different combinations of the promoter III and enhancer sequences of CITA .
After correction of transfection efficiency with B-galactosidase , the data were expressed as the ratio of RLUs_ ' obtained in the HT144 cell line divided by the ~ ' obtained in the 42/95 cells .
These experiments correspond to an average of at least four independent experiments .
is possible that the longer form of CIITA ( initiated from the first ATG ) alone might be able of trans-activating the HLA-DQA gene .
It might be more active than the shorter form of CHITA or be more efficient concerning the removal of an HLA-DQA-specific repres-sor .
Indeed , we have observed a longer form of the CIITA protein in the HT144 cell line compared with the 42/95 cell line ( G. Barbieri , manuscript in preparation ) .
The last point we address in this work is the role of the constitutive expression of MHC class II molecules in melanoma , as this expression is considered as a progression marker ( 15-17 ) .
Tumor Ags can be presented via the HLA-DR molecules in melanoma cell lines ( 8 ) , and the lack of costimulatory molecules might lead to tumor-specific T lymphocyte anergy .
A second hypothesis is that the constitutive expression of CIITA might enhance cell growth .
However , in our hands , CIITA overexpression in transfected cells tends to slow down the cell growth ( our unpublished observations ) .
We alternatively propose that the factor deregulating CITA transcription might confer a selective advantage to the tumor cells .
Finally , CIITA might activate the expression of genes that could facilitate tumor invasiveness or immune escape .
In agreement with this hypothesis , CIITA was recently shown as able to repress the expression of Fas ligand in T lymphocytes ( 52 ) .
A closer analysis pGL2-basic |f pllIDEL4.CIITA plIDEL2.CITA 0 ~ 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 RLU Firefly / gal pGL3-basic |W pGL3-SV40 pGL3-8¥40.Enh 60 20 40 RLU Firefly / RLU Renilla plHDEL4.CITA Enh plIDEL2.CIITA sree 4085 .
545 +123 FIGURE 10 .
Luciferase assays performed in the HT144 cell line using different constructs whose structure is detailed at the bottom of the figure .
The experiments were performed in triplicate , using either a B-galactosidase ( upper figure ) or a Renilla ( lower figure ) reporter gene vector to control for transfection efficiency .
pGL3-5v40 pGL3-5¥40.Enh 5266 .
-do8s 6107 '0t 4epy uo 1san8 4q [ 810 fountwrut [ 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor The Journal of Immunology pHIDEL4.CHTA.Luc pHIDEL2.CHTA.Luc pIIIDEL2.Brn-Del.Luc pIIIDEL2.Brn-Mut.Luc 42/95 pHIDEL4.CHTA.Luc pHIDEL2.CHTA.Luc pHIDEL2.Brn-Del.Luc pHIDEL2.Brn-Mut.Luc HT144 30000 0 10000 20000 Luciferase activity FIGURE 11 .
Luciferase assays performed in the 42/95 and HT144 melanoma cell lines with constructs containing either point mutations or partial deletion of the putative binding site of Brn-2 located in the enhancer of CIITA .
Experiments were performed in triplicate and were expressed in RLUs_ ' after correction for transfection efficiency with B-galactosidase .
of genes activated or repressed by CIITA must therefore be un-dertaken , as this protein might well interact with a much broader number of target genes than previously thought .
We and others have previously reported that different tumor cell lines display MHC class II alteration of expression , and that CIITA is the direct or indirect target of these alterations ( 53 , 54 ) .
The analysis of such cells will help to gain further insights in CIITA expression and function , and thereby in MHC class II gene regulation .
In addition , these studies might help in the understanding of the mechanisms involved in the escape of tumors from the immune system .
Acknowledgments We thank E. Tartour for the melanoma cell lines , E. Benveniste for the CIITA promoter IV constructs , and B. Grospierre-Lisowska and R. Al-Daccak for helpful discussions .
References 1 .
Kirkwood , J. M. 1996 .
Biological therapy of melanoma .
Proc .
Am .
Assoc .
Cancer Res .
37:643 .
2 .
Boon , T. , and L. J .
Old .
1997 .
Cancer tumor antigens .
Curr .
Opin .
Immunol .
9:681 .
3 .
Rosenberg , S. A. , J. C. Yang , D. J. Schwartzentruber , P. Hwu , F. M. Marincola , S. L. Topalian , N. P. Restifo , M. E. Dudley , S. L. Schwarz , P. J. Spiess , ct al .
1998 .
Immunologic and therapeutic evaluation of a synthetic peptide vaccine for the treatment of patients with metastatic melanoma .
Nat .
Med .
4:321 .
4 .
Thurner , B. , I. Haendle , C. Roder , D. Dieckmann , P. Keikavoussi , H. Jonuleit , A. Bender , C. Maczek , D. Schreiner , P. von den Driesch , et al .
1999 .
Vaccination with MAGE-3A1 peptide-pulsed mature , monocyte-derived dendritic cells expands specific cytotoxic T cells and induces regression of some metastases in advanced stage IV melanoma .
J. Exp .
Med .
190:1669 .
5 .
Benitez , R. , D. Godelaine , M. A. Lopez-Nevot , F. Brasseur , P. Jimenez , M. Marchand , M. R. Oliva , N. van Baren , T. Cabrera , G. Andry , et al .
1998 .
Mutations of the B , -microglobulin gene result in a lack of HLA class I molecules on melanoma cells of two patients immunized with MAGE peptides .
Tissue Antigens 52:520 .
6 .
Toes , R. E. M. , F. Ossendorp , R. Offringa , and C. J. M. Melief .
1999 .
CD4 T cells and their role in antitumor immune response .
J. Exp .
Med .
189:753 .
7 .
Topalian , S. L. , M. I. Gonzales , M. Parkhurst , Y. F. Li , S. Southwood , A. Sette , S. A. Rosenberg , and P. F. Robbins .
1996 .
Melanoma-specific CD4* T cells recognize nonmutated HLA-DR-restricted tyrosinase epitopes .
J. Exp .
Med .
183 ; 1965 .
8 .
Manici , S. , T. Sturniolo , M. A. Imro , J .
Hammer , F. Sinigaglia , C. Noppen , G. Spagnoli , B. Mazzi , M. Bellone , P. Dellabona , and M. P. Protti .
1999 .
Melanoma cells present a MAGE-3 epitope to CD4 * cytotoxic T cells in association with histocompatibility leukocyte antigen DR11 .
J. Exp .
Med .
189:871 .
9 .
Maccalli , C. , R. Mortarini , G. Parmiani , and A. Anichini .
1994 .
Multiple subsets of CD4* and CD8 * cytotoxic T-cell clones directed to autologous human melanoma identified by cytokine profiles .
Int .
J .
Cancer 57:56 .
10 .
Becker , J. C. , T. Brabletz , C. Czemmy , C. Termeer , and E. B. Brocker .
1993 .
Tumor escape mechanisms from immunosurveillance : induction of unresponsive-ness in a specific MHC-restricted CD4 * human T cell clone by the autologous MHC class II* melanoma .
Int .
Immunol .
5:1501 .
11 .
Winchester , R. J. , C. Y. Wang , A. Gibofsky , H. G. Kunkel , K. O. Lloyd , and L. J .
Old .
1978 .
Expression of Ta-like antigens on cultured human malignant melanoma cell lines .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 75:6235 .
12 .
14 .
15 .
17 .
18 .
19 .
20 .
21 .
22 .
23 .
24 .
25 .
26 .
27 .
28 .
29 .
30 .
31 .
32 .
33 .
34 .
35 .
36 .
37 .
38 .
39 .
105 Ruiter , D. J. , W. Bergman , K. Welvaart , E. Scheffer , W. A. van Vloten , C. Russo , and S. Ferrone .
1984 .
Immunchistochemical analysis of malignant melanomas and nevocellular nevi with monoclonal antibodies to distinct monomorphic determinants of HLA antigens .
Cancer Res .
44:3930. .
Glimcher , L. H. , and C. J. Kara .
1992 .
Sequences and factors : a guide to MHC class II transcription .
Annu .
Rev .
Immunol .
10:13 .
Zeng , G. , C. E. Touloukian , X. Wang , N. P. Restifo , S. A. Rosenberg , and R. F. Wang .
2000 .
Identification of CD4 * T cell epitopes from NY-ESO-1 presented by HLA-DR molecules .
J. Immunol .
165:1153 .
Brocker , E. B. , L. Suter , and C. Sorg .
1984 .
HLA-DR antigen expression in primary melanomas of the skin .
J .
Invest .
Dermatol .
82:244. .
Ostmeier , H. , B. Fuchs , F. Otto , R. Mawick , A. Lippold , V. Krieg , and L. Suter .
1999 .
Can immunohistochemical markers and mitotic rate improve prognostic precision in patients with primary melanoma ?
Cancer 85:2391 .
Bambhill , R. L. 1993 .
Pathology and prognostic factors .
Curr .
Opin .
Oncol .
5:364 .
Staveley-O'Connor , K. , E. Sotomayor , J. Montgomery , I. Borrello , L. Hwang , S. Fein , D. Pardoll , and H. Levitsky .
1998 .
Induction of antigen-specific T cell anergy : an carly event in the course of tumor progression .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 95:1178 .
Tsujisaki , M. , M. Igarashi , K. Sakaguchi , M. Hisinger , M. Herlyn , and S. Ferronc .
1987 .
Immunochemical and functional analysis of HLA class II antigens induced by recombinant interferon on normal epidermal melanocytes .
J. Immunol .
138 : 1310 .
Klein , C. , B. Lisowska-Grospierre , F. LeDeist , A. Fischer , and C. Griscelli .
1993 .
Major histocompatibility complex class II deficiency : clinical manifestations , immunologic features , and outcome .
J. Pediatr .
123:921 .
Botazzo , G. F. , I. Todd , R. Mirakian , A. Belfiore , and R. Pujol-Borrell .
1986 .
Organ-specific autoimmunity : a ( 1986 ) overview .
Immunol .
Rev .
94:137 .
Ting , J .
P.-Y .
, and X.-S. Zhu .
1999 .
Class II MHC genes : a model gene regulatory system with great biologic consequences .
Microbes Infect .
1:855 .
Masternak , K. , E. Barras , M. Zufferey , B. Conrad , G. Corthals , R. Aebersold , J. C. Sanchez , D. F. Hochstrasser , B. Mach , and W. Reith .
1998 .
A gene encoding a novel RFX-associated transactivator is mutated in the majority of MHC class II deficiency patients .
Nat .
Genet .
20:273 .
Durand , B. , P. Sperisen , P. Emery , B. Barras , M. Zufferey , B. Mach , and W. Reith .
1997 .
RFXAP , a novel subunit of the RFX DNA binding complex , is mutated in MHC class II deficiency .
EMBO J .
16:1045 .
Steimle , V. , B. Durand , E. Barras , M. Zufferey , M. R. Hadam , B. Mach , and W. Reith .
1995 .
A novel DNA-binding regulatory factor is mutated in primary MHC class II deficiency ( bare lymphocyte syndrome ) .
Genes Dev .
9:1021 .
Moreno , C. S. , G. W. Beresford , P. Louis-Plence , A. C. Morris , and J. M. Boss .
1999 .
CREB regulates MHC class II expression in a CITA-dependent manner .
Immunity 10:143 .
Mantovani , R. , U. Pessara , F. Tronche , X.-Y .
Li , A.-M. Knapp , J.-L. Pasquali , C. Benoist , and D. Mathis .
1992 .
Monoclonal antibodies to NF-Y define its function in MHC class II and albumin gene transcription .
EMBO J .
11:3315 .
Steimle , V. , L. A. Otten , M. Zufferey , and B. Mach .
1993 .
Complementation cloning of an MHC class II transactivator mutated in hereditary MHC class II deficiency ( or bare lymphocyte syndrome ) .
Cell 75:135 .
Zhu , X. S. , M. W. Linhoff , G. Li , K. C. Chin , S. N. Maity , and J. P. Ting .
2000 .
Transcriptional scaffold : CIITA interacts with NF-Y , RFX , and CREB to cause stereospecific regulation of the class II major histocompatibility complex promoter .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
20:6051 .
Steimle , V. , C. A. Siegrist , A. Mottet , B. Lisowska-Grospierre , and B. Mach .
1994 .
Regulation of MHC class II expression by interferon-y mediated by the transactivator gene CIITA .
Science 265:106 .
Silacci , P. , A. Mottet , V. Steimle , W. Reith , and B. Mach .
1994 .
Developmental extinction of major histocompatibility complex class II gene expression in plasmocytes is mediated by silencing of the transactivator gene CIITA .
J. Exp .
Med .
180:1329 .
Mublethaler-Mottet , A. , L. A. Otten , V. Steimle , and B. Mach .
1997 .
Expression of MHC class II molecules in different cellular and functional compartments is controlled by differential usage of multiple promoters of the transactivator CIITA .
EMBO J .
16:2851 .
Lennon , A. M. , C. Ottone , G. Rigaud , L. L. Deaven , J. Longmire , M. Fellous , R. Bono , and C. Alcaide-Loridan .
1997 .
Isolation of a B-cell-specific promoter for the human class II transactivator .
Immunogenetics 45:266 .
Piskurich , J. F. , Y. Wang , M. W. Linhoff , L. C. White , and J. P. Ting .
1998 .
Identification of distinct regions of 5° flanking DNA that mediate constitutive , IFN-y , STAT1 , and TGP-B-regulated expression of the class II transactivator gene .
J. Immunol .
160:233 .
Mublethaler-Mottet , A. , W. Di Berardino , L. A. Otten , and B. Mach .
1998 .
Activation of the MHC class II transactivator CITA by interferon-y requires cooperative interaction between Statl and USB-1 .
Immunity 8:157 .
Piskurich , J. F. , M. W. Linhoff , Y. Wang , and J. P. Ting .
1999 .
Two distinct y interferon-inducible promoters of the major histocompatibility complex class II transactivator gene are differentially regulated by STAT1 , interferon regulatory factor 1 , and transforming growth factor B. Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
19:431 .
Bono , R. , F. Hyafil , J. Kalil , V. Koblar , J. Wiels , E. Wollman , and M. Fellous .
1979 .
Monoclonal antibodies against HLA-DRw antigens .
Transplant .
Clin .
Immunol .
11:109 .
Watson , A. J. , R. DeMars , I. S. Trowbridge , and F. H. Bach .
1983 .
Detection of a novel human class II HLA antigen .
Nature 304:358 .
Fermand , J. P. , C. Schmitt , and J. C. Brouct .
1985 .
Distribution of class II DQ antigens on normal and leukemic lymphoid cells .
Eur .
J. Immunol .
15:1183 .
6107 '0t 4epy uo 1san8 4q [ 810 fountwrut [ 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor 106 40 .
41 .
42 .
43 .
45 .
46 .
Spacte , R. R. , and E. S. Mocarski .
1985 .
Regulation of cytomegalovirus gene expression : & and promoters are transactivated by viral functions in permissive human fibroblasts .
J. Virol .
56:135 .
Peijnenburg , A. , R. Van den Berg , M. J .
Van Eggermond , O. Sanal , J. M. Vossen , A. M. Lennon , C. Alcaide-Loridan , and P. J .
Van den Elsen .
2000 .
Defective MHC class II expression in an MHC class II deficiency patient is caused by a novel deletion of a splice donor site in the MHC class II transactivator gene .
Immunogenetics 51:42 .
Rohn , W. , L. P. Tang , Y. Dong , and E. N. Benveniste .
1999 .
IL-1 $ inhibits IFN-y-induced class II MHC expression by suppressing transcription of the class II transactivator gene .
J. Immunol .
162:886 .
Li , P. , X .
He , M. R. Gerrero , M. Mok , A. Aggarwal , and M. G. Rosenfeld .
1993 .
Spacing and orientation of bipartite DNA-binding motifs as potential functional determinants for POU domain factors .
Genes Dev .
7:2483. .
Schindler , C. , and J. E. Darnell .
1995 .
Transcriptional responses to polypeptide ligands : the JAK-STAT pathway .
Annu .
Rev .
Biochem .
64:621 .
Lennon , A. M. , C. Oftone , M. Rosemblatt , M. Fellous , M. R. Bono , and C. Alcaide-Loridan .
1998 .
CHTA B-cell-specific promoter suppression in MHC class I-silenced cell hybrids .
Immunogenetics 48:283 .
Angus , J. , F. Thomson , K. Murphy , E. Baker , G. R. Sutherland , P. G. Parsons , and R. A. Sturm .
1995 .
The Brn-2 gene regulates the melanocytic phenotype and tumorigenic potential of human melanoma cells .
Oncogene 11:691 .
47 .
48 .
49 .
50 .
51 .
52 .
53 .
54 .
ABNORMAL TRANSCRIPTION OF CIITA IN MELANOMA CELL LINES Eisen , T. , D. J. Easty , D. C. Bennett , and C. R. Goding .
1995 .
The POU domain transcription factor Brn-2 : elevated expression in malignant melanoma and regulation of melanocyte-specific gene expression .
Oncogene 11:2157 .
Eisen , T. G. 1996 .
The control of gene expression in melanocytes and melano-mas .
Melanoma Res .
6:277 .
Often , L. A. , V. Steimle , S. Bontron , and B. Mach .
1998 .
Quantitative control of MHC class II expression by the transactivator CITA .
Eur .
J. Immunol .
28:473 .
Alcaide-Loridan , C. , A. M. Lennon , M. R. Bono , R. Barbouche , K. Dellagi , andM .
Fellous .
1999 .
Differential expression of MHC class II isotype chains .
Microbes Infect .
1:929 .
Kimura , A. , and T. Sasazuki .
1991 .
Polymorphism in the 5 `` flanking region of the HLA-DQA1 gene and its relation to the DR-DQ phenotype .
In HLA 1997 , Vol .
2 .
K. Tsui , M. Aizawa , and T. Sasazuki , eds .
Oxford Science Publications , Oxford , p. 382 .
Gourley , T. S. , and C. H. Chang .
2001 .
The class II transactivator prevents activation-induced cell death by inhibiting fas ligand gene expression .
J. Immunol .
166:2917 .
Lennon , A. , C. Ottone , A. Peijnenburg , C. Hamon-Benais , F. Colland , S. Gobin , P. van den Elsen , M. Fellous , R. Bono , and C. Alcaide-Loridan .
1996 .
The RAG cell line defines a new complementation group of MHC class II deficiency .
Immunogenetics 43:352 .
Lu , Y. , G. D. Ussery , M. M. Muncaster , B. L. Gallic , and G. Blanck .
1994 .
Evidence for retinoblastoma protein ( RB ) dependent and independent IFN-y re-sponses : RB coordinately rescues IFN-y induction of MHC class II gene transcription in noninducible breast carcinoma cells .
Oncogene 9:1015 .
6107 '0t 4epy uo 1san8 4q [ 810 fountwrut [ 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor
