[ CANCER RESEARCH ( SUPPL ) 45 , 45595-45625 , September 1985 ] Interleukin 2 Receptor ( Tac Antigen ) Expression in HTLV-l-associated Adult T-Cell Leukemia Thomas A. Waldmann , Dan L. Longo , Warren J. Leonard , Joel M. Depper , Craig B. Thompson , Martin Kronke , Carolyn K. Goldman , Susan Sharrow , Kathleen Bongiovanni , and Warner C. Greene Metabolism , Medicine , and Immunology Branches , National Cancer Institute , NIH , Naval Medical Research Institute , Bethesda , Maryland 20205 Abstract Interieukin-2 ( IL-2 ) is a lymphokine synthesized by some T-cells following activation .
Resting T-cells do not express IL-2 receptors , but receptors are rapidly expressed on T-cells following interaction of antigens , mitogens , or monoclonal antibodies with the antigen-specific T-cell receptor complex .
Using anti-T ac , a monoclonal antibody that recognizes the IL-2 receptor , the receptor has been purified and shown to be a M , 33,000 peptide that is posttranslationally glycosylated to a M , 55,000 mature form .
Normal resting T-cells and most leukemic T-cell populations do not express IL-2 receptors ; however , the leukemic cells of the 11 patients examined who had human T-cell lymphotropic virus-associated adult T-cell leukemia expressed the Tac antigen .
in human T-cell lymphotropic virus-l infected cells , the M , 42,000 long open reading frame protein encoded in part by the pxX region of this virus may act as a transacting transcriptional activator that induces IL-2 receptor gene transcription , thus providing an explanation for the constant association of IL-2 receptor expression with adult T-cell lymphotropic virus- !
infection of lymphoid cells .
The constant expression of large numbers of IL-2 receptors which may be aberrant may play a role in the uncontrolled growth of adult T-cell leukemia cells .
Two patients with Tac-positive adult T-cell leukemia have been treated with the anti-Tac .
One of the patients had 6- and 3-mo remissions of his leukemia following two courses of therapy with this monoclonal antibody directed toward this growth factor receptor .
Introduction The induction of an immune response to a foreign antigen requires the activation of T-lymphocytes with receptors for the specific antigen .
The human antigen-specific T-cell receptor has been shown to be a M , 90,000 polymorphic heterodimer of a and 3 chains of approximately molecular weight of 40,000 to 50,000 associated with three nonpolymorphic peptide chains of molecular weight of 20,000 to 28,000 identified by the T-3 monoclonal antibody ( 1-3 ) .
T-cell activation is initiated following the interaction of antigen with this complex antigen-specific T-cell receptor .
Two principal events occur at this point which are required for T-cell proliferation and the development of functionally active effector T-cells .
First , following interaction with antigen and the macrophage-derived interleukin-1 , T-cells synthesize and secrete the lymphokine IL-2 `` ( 4 , 5 ) .
In order to exert its biological effects , IL-2 must interact with high-affinity-specific membrane receptors ( 6 ) .
Resting T-cells do not express IL-2 receptors , but * Presented at the HTLV Symposium , December 6 and 7 , 1984 , Bethesda , MD .
* The abbreviations used are : IL-2 , interleukin-2 ; PHA , phytohemagglutinin ; HTLV , human T-cell lymphotropic virus ; ATL , adult T-cell leukemia ; FITC , fluores-cein isothiocyanate ; LTR , long terminal repeat ; LOR , long open reading frame ; ProMACE-MOPP , predisone , cyclophosphamide , doxorubicin , VP-16 , methotrex-ate with leucovorin rescue .
receptors are rapidly expressed on T-cells following activation with antigen or mitogen .
Thus , both the growth factor interleukin-2 and its receptor are absent in resting T-cells , but following activation , the genes for both proteins become expressed .
Thus , both the production of interleukin-2 and the expression of the interleukin-2 receptors are pivotal events in the full expression of the human immune response .
While the antigen confers specificity for a given immune response , the interaction of IL-2 and IL-2 receptors determines its magnitude and duration .
The specific membrane receptor for IL-2 on human lymphocytes has been identified using a monoclonal antibody ( anti-T ac ) directed towards this molecule ( 7-9 ) .
The anti-Tac monoclonal antibody , prepared by Uchiyama et al .
( 7 ) , was selected on the basis of its ability to bind to activated T-cells but not to resting T-cells , B-cells , or monocytes .
This pattern of cellular reactivity was identical with the distribution of IL-2 receptors reported by Robb et al .
( 6 ) .
We therefore hypothesized that anti-Tac recognizes the human receptor for IL-2 ( 8 , 9 ) .
Data in support of this hypothesis are as follows : anti-T ac blocks the IL-2-induced DNA synthesis of IL-2-dependent continuous T-cell lines but does not inhibit DNA synthesis of 1L-2-independent T-cell lines ; anti-Tac blocks over 95 % of the binding of [ °H ] IL-2 to HUT 102-B2 cells and PHA-activated lymphoblasts ; and IL-2 at high concentration blocks the binding of H-labeled anti-T ac to PHA-activated lym-phoblasts .
The requirement for high concentrations of IL-2 is explained by the observation that anti-T ac identifies two species of IL-2 receptors , one with a high ( 107 m ) and one with a lower affinity of IL-2 binding .
Furthermore , Robb and Greene ( 10 ) demonstrated that an initial passage of radiolabeled proteins from PHA lymphoblasts through either an IL-2-coupled affinity support or a column of anti-T ac coupled to Sepharose effectively removed molecules reactive with the alternative support .
Thus , under the conditions used , all anti-Tac-reactive molecules appeared capable of binding IL-2 , and the ability to bind IL-2 was limited to the Tac protein .
Utilizing the anti-T ac monoclonal antibody , we have defined a variety of T- and B-lymphocyte functions that require an interaction of IL-2 with its inducible receptor on activated lymphocytes ( 11 , 12 ) .
The addition of anti-Tac to in vitro culture systems blocked the IL-2-induced DNA synthesis of IL-2-dependent T-cell lines and inhibited soluble auto- and alloantigen-induced T-cell proliferation .
Furthermore , it abrogated the generation of cytotoxic and suppressor effector T-cells but did not inhibit their action once generated .
The anti-receptor antibody also inhibited the proliferation and immunoglobulin synthesis of purified B-cells stimulated with Staphylococcus Cowan strain | organisms .
In the present study the anti-Tac monoclonal antibody was used to characterize IL-2 receptor expression in HTLV-l-associated adult T-cell leukemia .
Furthermore , we report the initial results of a clinical trial to evaluate the efficacy of i.v .
administered CANCER RESEARCH VOL .
45 SEPTEMBER 1985 4559s Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on May 10 , 2019 .
© 1985 American Association for Cancer Research .
IL-2 RECEPTOR EXPRESSION IN HTLV-I-ASSOCIATED LEUKEMIA anti-Tac monoclonal antibody in the treatment of patients with the adult T-cell leukemia .
Materials and Methods Patient Population .
T-cells were studied from 17 normal individuals , 10 patients with the Sézary leukemia who did not have antibodies to HTLV-I , 11 patients with the ATL , 5 patients with acute T-cell leukemia , and the lines CCRF-CEM , Molt-4 , RPMI-8402T , and CCRF-HSB-2 derived from patients with acute T-cell leukemia ( 13 ) .
The patients with the diagnosis of the Sézary syndrome presented with exfoliative erythro-derma , lymphadenopathy , and a white blood count ranging from 12,600 to 124,000 cells/mm ?
® .
The patients with ATL had skin involvement usually in the form of plaque-like lesions and had white blood counts ranging from 11,200 to 105,000/mm* .
Six of the patients were hyper-calcemic .
Each of the patients with ATL had serum antibodies to the M , 19,000 core protein of HTLV-I and had incorporated this virus into the genome of the leukemic cells ( 14 ) .
Immunofluorescence Analysis of Cells with Fluorescence-activated Cell Sorter .
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were analyzed using immunofluorescence and fluorescence-activated cell sorter analysis by a slight modification of a procedure described previously ( 15 ) .
The cells of patients who were not being treated with the monoclonal antibody were analyzed by indirect immunofluorescence using anti-Tac and 7G7 , antibodies to different epitopes of the IL-2 receptor ; 3A-1 , an antibody to an antigen expressed on normal T-cells but not on Sézary or adult T-cell leukemic cells ( 16 ) , and the T4 , T8 , and T9 antibodies ( Ortho Pharmaceuticals , Raritan , NJ ) and the Leu 4 antibody ( Becton-Dickenson & Co. , Sunnyvale , CA ) as the first antibody and FITC-conjugated goat anti-mouse immunoglobulin ( Coulter Electronics , Hi-aleah , FL ) as the second antibody .
Following therapy with anti-Tac , the T-cells of the patients were analyzed by direct immunofluorescence using FITC conjugates of goat anti-mouse immunoglobulin , anti- Tac , 7G7 , 3A-1 , T9 , and Leu 4 .
FITC-conjugated goat IgG was used as the negative control .
Determination of TG Gene Configuration .
The arrangement of the TB genes in the leukemic T-ceils of a patient with ATL at various periods prior to and following therapy with anti-T ac was analyzed and compared to the arrangement of these genes in peripheral blood buffy coat cells of normal individuals , and in a B-cell line that was established from the patient using the Epstein-Barr virus .
High molecular weight DNA was extracted from the leukemic and normal cells and was digested to completion with BamHI , size fractionated over agarose gels by electro-phoresis , and transferred to nitrocellulose paper ( 17 , 18 ) .
Such paper-bound DNA fragments were then hybridized to a random primed [ °PJDNA probe to the constant domain of the TB gene ( 19 ) obtained from Mark Davis .
After washes at the appropriate stringency , the TB gene configurations were visualized on autoradiograms .
Results and Discussion IL-2 Receptor Expression in Adult T-Cell Leukemia .
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients with three forms of T-cell leukemia-acute T-cell leukemia , the Sézary leukemia , and adult T-cell leukemia-were analyzed for IL-2 receptor expression using indirect immunofluorescence using the anti-Tac monoclonal antibody .
The acute T-cell leukemic populations and lines derived from such cells did not express IL-2 receptors .
Furthermore , nine of the ten populations of Sézary leukemic T-cells not associated with HTLV-I examined were Tac antigen negative ( 13 ) .
In contrast , all of the populations of leukemic cells from the 11 patients studied with the adult T-cell leukemia associated with HTLV-I expressed the Tac antigen .
Thus , the demonstration of IL-2 receptors on leukemic T-cells may aid in differentiating those leukemias caused by HTLV-I , which are Tac antigen positive , from other forms of T-cell leukemia which are , in general , Tac antigen negative .
The IL-2 receptor expression on adult T-cell leukemic cells differed from that on normal T-cells .
First , unlike normal T-cells , ATL cells do not require prior activation to express the IL-2 receptors .
Furthermore , using a °H-labeled anti-Tac receptor assay , HTLV-I infected leukemic T-cell lines characteristically expressed 5- to 10-fold more receptors per cell ( 270,000 to 640,000 ) than did maximally PHA-stimulated T-lymphoblasts ( 30,000 to 60,000 ) ( 20 ) .
Since the cell volume of these leukemic cells was only 13 % greater than that of PHA lymphoblasts , the density of IL-2 receptors on these leukemic cells was correspondingly increased .
in addition , whereas normal PHA-stimulated human T-lymphocytes maintained in culture with IL-2 demonstrated a rapid decline in receptor number from a maximum of 20,000 receptors per cell on Day 3 to approximately 5,000 on Day 13 , the ATL lines did not show a similar decline .
Furthermore , we have noted that some , but not all , HTLV-I infected continuous T-cell lines display aberrantly sized IL-2 receptors ( 21 , 22 ) .
For example , the receptor on HTLV-I infected HUT 102-B2 cells is approximately 5,000 daltons smaller than that on PHA lympho-blasts .
Using pulse chase , tunicamycin , endoglycosidase , and neuraminidase analyses , the difference in receptor size was shown to be due to differences in posttranslational modification of the M , 33,000 protein backbone ( 21 , 22 ) .
Furthermore , the receptors on the HUT 102-B2 cells manifested less sulfation than did normal receptors .
Finally , Uchiyama and coworkers ( 23 , 24 ) have reported that IL-2 receptors on ATL cells are not modulated ( down-regulated ) by anti-Tac ( unlike normal activated T-cells ) and that IL-2 receptors on ATL cell lines were spontaneously ( IL-2 independently ) phosphorylated , whereas the phosphorylation of receptors on PHA-stimulated T-cells requires the addition of IL-2 .
it is conceivable that the constant presence of high numbers of IL-2 receptors on the adult T-cell leukemic cells and/or the aberrancy of these receptors may play a major role in the pathogenesis of uncontrolled growth of these malignant T-cells .
As noted above , the T-cell leukemias caused by HTLV-I express the Tac antigen .
In addition , all T-cell and the five B-cell lines we examined that were infected with HTLV-I universally expressed large numbers of IL-2 receptors .
A recent report by Sodorski et al .
( 25 ) suggests a potential mechanism for this association between HTLV-I and IL-2 receptor expression .
The complete sequence of HTLV-I has been determined by Seiki et al .
( 26 ) .
In addition to the gag , pol , env , and LTR sequences common to other groups of retroviruses , HTLV-I was shown to contain an additional genomic region between env and the LTR referred to as pX .
Sodorski et al .
( 25 ) demonstrated that a M , 38,000 to 42,000 protein termed LOR is encoded , in large measure , by the 3 ' 1000 bases of the pX region and that this LOR protein may act as a transacting regulator of transcription .
They demonstrated that the LOR protein acts on regulatory sequences in the LTRs of HTLV-I , -II , and -llI stimulating transcription .
The LOR protein could theoretically also play a central role in increasing the transcription of host genes such as the IL-2 receptor gene involved in T-cell activation and HTLV-l-mediated leukemogenesis .
With the cloning of the gene encoding the IL-2 receptor ( 27 ) , this hypothesis that the LOR protein acts as a transacting regulator of transcription of the IL-2 receptor gene can now be readily tested .
CANCER RESEARCH VOL .
45 SEPTEMBER 1985 4560s Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on May 10 , 2019 .
© 1985 American Association for Cancer Research .
IL-2 RECEPTOR EXPRESSION IN HTLV-I-ASSOCIATED LEUKEMIA Treatment of Patients with Adult T-Cell Leukemia with the Anti-Tac Monoconal Antibody .
We have initiated a clinical trial to evaluate the efficacy of i.v .
administered anti-T ac monoclonal antibody in the treatment of patients with the adult T-cell leukemia .
The scientific basis for these studies is the observation that adult T-cell leukemia cells express the Tac antigen , whereas normal resting T-cells and their precursors do not .
Two patients with adult T-cell leukemia have been treated with i.v .
administered anti-Tac .
Neither patient suffered any untoward reactions nor did they produce antibodies reactive with mouse immunoglobulin or the idiotype of the anti-Tac monoclonal .
One patient with a very rapidly developing form of adult T-cell leukemia had a very transient response .
However , therapy of the other patient was followed by a 6-mo remission as assessed by regression of skin lesions , routine hematological tests , immunofiluorescence analysis , and molecular genetic analysis of the arrangement of T-cell receptor 8 chain genes .
The patient , a 24-yr-old black man , developed cryptococcal meningitis and papular neoplastic skin lesions that showed diffuse mixed lymphoma on histological examination .
The patient was treated with nine cycles of ProMACE-MOPP chemotherapy and had a complete remission lasting 26 mo .
He relapsed with recurrent papular adenopathy , hypercalcemia , and a peripheral blood WBC count of 26,800/ mm .
He achieved a second complete remission on Pro-MACE-MOPP chemotherapy and had a series of remissions and re-lapses .
Five mo after the last course of ProMACE-MOPP chem-otherapy , the patient had a relapse with 2,200 malignant T-cells/ mm ?
in the circulation as assessed by immunofluorescence analysis using the anti-Tac monoclonal antibody .
Furthermore , 1,200 of these circulating Iymphocytes/mm® reacted with T9 , an antibody to the transferrin receptor , which is a receptor expressed on the malignant but not on normal circulating T-cells .
The patient was then treated with three i.v .
infusions ( 20 , 40 , and 40 mg ) of the anti-Tac monoclonal antibody over a 10-day period .
Following the anti-T ac therapy , there was a decline in the number of circulating T-cells bearing the Tac antigen from 2,200 to less than 100/mm* and of transferrin receptor expressing T-cells from 1,200 to less than 100/mm® .
During the 4-wk period following the anti-T ac infusions , there were no cells with free IL-2 receptors , i.e .
, with receptors unblocked by the infused anti-Tac monoclonal , whereas small numbers of circulating cells with anti-Tac blocking the IL-2 receptor were identified .
Cells with blocked IL-2 receptors were identified as cells that were not reactive with FITC-conjugated anti-Tac but were reactive with FITC-conjugated anti-mouse IgG and with the 7G7 monoclonal antibody , an antibody that identifies an epitope of the IL-2 receptor peptide other than that identified by anti-Tac .
The remission of the T-cell leukemia in this patient was confirmed utilizing molecular genetic analysis of the arrangement of the genes encoding the 8 chain of the antigen-specific T-cell receptor .
Southern analysis of the arrangement of the T-cell receptor B chain gene was performed on BamHI digests of DNA from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of the patient using a radiolabeled probe to the constant region of the TR chain .
The constant TB genes were universally present on a 24-kilobase BamHI fragment in germ-line tissues of normal individuals and in a B-cell line derived from the patient .
However , prior to therapy , there was an additional 22-kilobase BamHI band hybridizing with the constant T , probe when digests of the patient 's circulating T-cells were examined , a hallmark of a clonal expansion of T lymphocytes .
This band reflecting the clonally rearranged T-cell receptor gene was not demonstrable on specimens obtained following anti-Tac therapy when the patient was in remission .
Six mo following the initial remission , the leukemia recurred with a reappearance of circulating leukemic cells , identified by immunofluorescence and molecular genetic analysis , and with the development of large ( 5 x 7 x 1 cm ) malignant skin lesions .
A second course of three i.v .
infusions of 20 mg each of anti-Tac over a 10-day period was followed by the virtual disappearance of the skin lesions and an over 90 % reduction in the number of circulating leukemic cells .
Three mo subsequently leukemic cells were again demonstrable in the circulation .
At this time the leukemia was no longer responsive to infusions of anti-T ac , and the patient required further chemotherapy .
There was no toxicity associated with the anti-T ac therapy nor was there a reduction in the number of any of the normal formed elements of the blood including normal T-cells .
Normal T-cells could be identified by immunofluorescence analysis , since they expressed the antigen defined by the 3A-1 monoclonal antibody , whereas the leukemic cells did not express this antigen .
The patient did not produce antibodies to mouse IgG nor to the idiotype of anti-T ac as assessed using an enzyme-linked immu-nosorbent assay procedure .
These therapeutic studies have been extended in vitro by examining the efficacy of toxins coupled to anti-T ac in selectively inhibiting the protein synthesis and the viability of Tac-positive adult T-cell leukemic cell lines .
The addition of anti-T ac antibody coupled to the A chain of the toxin ricin effectively inhibited protein synthesis by the HTLV-l-associated , Tac-positive adult T-cell leukemia line HUT 102-B2 .
In contrast , conjugates of ricin A with a control monocional of the same isotype did not inhibit protein synthesis when used in the same concentration ( 107° m ) ( 28 ) .
The inhibitory action of anti-Tac conjugated with ricin A could be abolished by the addition of excess unlabeled anti-Tac or IL-2 .
In parallel studies performed in collaboration with D. FitzGerald et a/ .
( 29 ) , Pseudomonas exotoxin conjugates of anti-Tac inhibited the protein synthesis by HUT 102-B2 cells but not that of the acute T-cell leukemia line Molt-4 that does not express the Tac antigen .
Again , the toxicity of the anti-Tac toxin conjugates could be inhibited by adding excess unlabeled anti-T ac .
Thus , the development of toxin conjugates of the monoclonal anti-T ac that is directed toward the IL-2 receptor expressed on adult T-cell leukemic cells may permit the development of a rational approach for the treatment of this almost uniformly fatal form of leukemia .
References 1 .
Allison , J. P. , Mcintyre , B. W. , and Bloch , D. Tumor-specific antigen of murine T-lymphoma defined with monoclonal antibody .
J .
Immunol .
, 129 ; 2293-2300 , 1982 .
2 .
Haskins , K. , Kubo , R. , White , J. , Pigeon , M. , Kappler , J. , and Marrack , P. The major histocompatibility complex-restricted antigen receptor on T cells .
isolation with a monoclonal antibody .
J. Exp .
Med .
, 157 : 1149-1169 , 1983 .
3 .
Meuer , S. C. , Fitzgerald , K. A. , Hussey , R. E. , Hodgdon , J. C. , Schiossman , S. F. , and Reinherz , E. L. Clonotypic structures involved in antigen-specific human T-cell function .
J. Exp .
Med .
, 157 : 705-719 , 1983 .
4 .
Morgan , D. A. , Ruscetti , F. W. , and Gallo , R. C. Selective in vitro growth of T lymphocytes from normal human bone marrows .
Science ( Wash. DC ) , 193 ; 1007-1008 , 1983 .
5 .
Smith , K. A. T-cell growth factor .
Immunol .
Rev .
, 51 : 337-357 , 1980 .
6 .
Robb , R. J. , Munck , A. , and Smith , K. A. T-cell growth factor receptors .
J. Exp .
Med .
, 154 ; 1455-1474 , 1981 .
7 .
Uchiyama , T. , Broder , S. , and Waldmann , T. A .
A monoclonal antibody ( anti- CANCER RESEARCH VOL .
45 SEPTEMBER 1985 4561s Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on May 10 , 2019 .
© 1985 American Association for Cancer Research .
10 .
11 .
12 .
13 .
14 .
15 .
16 .
17 .
18 .
IL-2 RECEPTOR EXPRESSION IN LEUKEMIA Tac ) reactive with activated and functionally mature human T cells .
1 .
Production of anti-Tac monocional antibody and distribution of Tac ( + ) cells .
J .
Immunol .
, 126 : 1393-1397 , 1981. .
Leonard , W. J. , Depper , J. M. , Uchiyama , T. , Smith , K. A. , Waldmann , T. A. , and Greene , W. C. A monoclonal antibody that appears to recognize the receptor for human T-cell growth factor ; partial characterization of the receptor .
Nature ( Lond . )
, 300 : 267-269 , 1982. .
Leonard , W. J. , Depper , J. M. , Robb , R. J. , Waldmann , T. A. , and Greene , W. C. Characterization of the human receptor for T-cell growth factor .
Proc .
Nati .
Acad .
Sci .
USA , 80 : 6957-6961 , 1983 .
Robb , R. J. , and Greene , W. C. Direct demonstration of the identity of T-cell growth factor binding protein and the Tac antigen .
J. Exp .
Med .
, 158 : 1332-1337 , 1983 .
Uchiyama , T. , Nelson , D. L. , Fleisher , T. A. , and Waldmann , T. A .
A monoclonal antibody ( anti-Tac ) reactive with activated and functionally mature human T cells .
II .
Expression of Tac antigen on activated cytotoxic killer T cells , suppressor cells , and on one of two types of helper T cells .
J .
Immunol .
, 126 : 1398-1403 , 1981 .
Depper , J. M. , Leonard , W. J. , Waldmann , T. A. , and Greene , W. C. Blockade of the interleukin-2 receptor by anti- Tac antibody : inhibition of human lympho-cyte activation .
J .
Immunol .
, 131 : 690-696 , 1983 .
Wakimann , T. A. , Greene , W. C. , Sarin , P. S. , Saxinger , C. , Blayney , W. , Blattner , W. A. , Gotdman , C. K. , Bongiovanni , K. , Sharrow , S. , Depper , J. M. , Leonard , W. , Uchiyama , T. , and Gallo , R. C. Functional and phenotypic comparison of human T cell leukemia/lymphoma virus negative Sézary leukemia and their distinction using anti-Tac , monoclonal antibody identifying the human receptor for T cell growth factor .
J. Clin .
Invest .
, 73 : 1711-1718 , 1984 .
Gallo , R. C. , and Wong-Staal , F. Retroviruses as etiologic agents of some animal and human leukemias and lymphomas and as tools for elucidating the molecular mechanism of leukemogenesis .
Blood , 60 : 545-557 , 1982 .
Mathieson , B. J. , Sharrow , S. O. , Campbell , P. S. , and Asofsky , R. LyT differentiated thymocytes sub-population detected by flow microfluorometry .
Nature ( Lond . )
, 277 : 478-480 , 1979 .
Haynes , B. F. , Metzgar , R. S. , Minna , J. D. , and Bunn , P. A. Phenotypic characterization of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma .
Use of monoclonal antibodies to compare with other malignant T cells .
N. Engl .
J .
Med .
, 304 : 1319-1323 , 1981 .
Polsky , F. , Edgell , M. H. , Seidman , J. G. , and Leder , P. High capacity get preparative electrophoresis for purification of fragments of genomic DNA .
Anal .
Biochem .
, 87 : 397-410 , 1978 .
Renard , G. , Stark , R. , and Waht , G. M. Detection of specific RNAs or specific 19 .
20 .
21 .
22 .
23 .
24 .
25 .
26 .
27 .
28. fragments of DNA by fractionation in gels and transfer of diazobenzyloxymethyl paper .
Methods Enzymol .
, 68 : 220-242 , 1980 .
Hedrick , S. M. , Cohen , D. I. , Nielsen , E. A. , and Davis , M. M. Isolation of cDNA clones encoding T-cell specific membrane-associated proteins .
Nature ( Lond . )
, 308 : 149-153 , 1984 .
Depper , J. M. , Leonard , W. J. , Kronke , M. , Waldmann , T. A. , and Greene , W. C. Augmentation of T-cell growth factor expression in HTLV-I infected human leukemic T cells .
J .
Immunol .
, 133 ; 1691-1695 , 1984 .
Leonard , W. J. , Depper , J. M. , Roth , J. S. , Rudikoff , S. , Waldmann , T. A. , and Greene , W. C. Aberrant T-cell growth factor ( TCGF ) receptors on human T-cell leukemia virus ( HTLV ) infected leukemic cells .
Clin .
Res .
, 37 : 348A , 1983 .
Leonard , W. J. , Depper , J. M. , Waldmann , T. A. , and Greene , W. C. A monecional antibody to the human receptor for T-cell growth factor .
in : M. F. Greaves ( ed . )
, Monoclonal Antibodies to Receptors : Probes for Receptor Structure and Function ; Receptors and Recognition , Ser .
B , Vol .
17 , pp .
45-46 .
London : Chapman and Hall , 1984 .
Uchiyama , T. , Wano , Y. , Tsudo , M. , Umadome , H. , Hori , T. , Tamori , S. , Yodoi , J. , and Maeda , M. Abnormal expression of Tac antigen ( IL-2 receptor ) in adult T-cell leukemia .
/n : M. Miwa ( ed . )
, Retroviruses in Human Lymphoma/Leuke-mia : The Fifteenth International Symposium of the Princess Takamatsu Cancer Research Fund .
Tokyo : Japan Scientific Society Press , in press , 1985 .
Tsudo , M. , Uchiyama , T. , Takatsuki , K. , Uchino , H. , and Yodoi , J. Modulation of Tac antigen on activated human T cells by anti-Tac monoclonal antibody .
J .
Immunol .
, 129 ; 592-595 , 1982 .
Sodorski , J. G. , Rosen , C. A. , and Haseltine , W. A. Transacting transcriptional activation of the long terminal repeat of human T lymphotrophic virus infected cells .
Science ( Wash. DC ) , 225 : 381-385 , 1984 .
Seiki , M. , Hattori , S. , Hirayama , Y. , and Yoshida , M. Human adult T-cell leukemia virus : complete nucleotide sequence of the provirus genome integrated in leukemia cell DNA .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA , 80 : 3618-3622 , 1983 .
Leonard , W. J. , Depper , J. M. , Crabtree , G. R. , Rudikoff , S. , Pumphrey , J. , Robb , R. J. , Kronke , M. , Svetlik , P. B. , Peffer , N. J. , Waldmann , T. A. , and Greene , W. C. Molecular cloning and expression of cDNAs for the human interleukin-2 receptor .
Nature ( Lond . )
, 311 : 626-631 , 1984 .
Kronke , M. , Depper , J. M. , Leonard , W. J. , Vitetta , E. S. , Waldmann , T. A. , and Greene , W. C. Anti-Tac-ricin A conjugates selectively inhibit protein synthesis in human T-cell leukemia/ymphoma virus infected leukemic T cells .
Blood , 65 : 1416-1421 , 1985. .
FitzGerald , D. J. P. , Wakdimann , T. A. , Willingham , M. C. , and Pastan , I. Pseudomonas exotoxin-anti- T ac .
Cell-specific immunotoxin active against cells expressing the human T-cell growth factor receptor .
J. Clin .
Invest .
, 74 : 966-971 , 1984 .
CANCER RESEARCH VOL .
45 SEPTEMBER 1985 4562s Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on May 10 , 2019 .
© 1985 American Association for Cancer Research .
AAGR American Association for Cancer Research Cancer Research The Journal of Cancer Research ( 1916-1930 ) | The American Journal of Cancer ( 1931-1940 ) Interleukin 2 Receptor ( Tac Antigen ) Expression in HTLV-l-associated Adult T-Cell Leukemia Thomas A. Waldmann , Dan L. Longo , Warren J. Leonard , et al .
Cancer Res 1985 ; 45:4559s-4562s .
Updated version Access the most recent version of this article at : http : //cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/45/9 _ Supplement/4559s E-mail alerts Reprints and Subscriptions Permissions Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal .
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal , contact the AACR Publications Department at pubs @ aacr.org .
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article , use this link http : //cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/45/9 _ Supplement/4559s .
Click on `` Request Permissions `` which will take you to the Copyright Clearance Center 's ( CCC ) Rightslink site .
Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on May 10 , 2019 .
© 1985 American Association for Cancer Research .
