JOURNAL OF ViroLOGY , July 1990 , p. 3234-3239 0022-538 X/90/073234-06 $ 02.00/0 Copyright © 1990 , American Society for Microbiology Vol .
64 , No .
7 A Novel T-Cell Protein Which Recognizes a Palindromic Sequence in the Negative Regulatory Element of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus Long Terminal Repeat KIM ORCHARD , * ?
NEIL PERKINS , `` CAROLINE CHAPMAN , `` JULIAN HARRIS , `` VINCENT EMERY , `` GRAHAM GOODWIN , `` DAVID LATCHMAN , * anp MARY COLLINS'* Institute of Cancer Research , Chester Beatty Laboratories , 237 Fulham Road , London SW3 6JB , ' Department of Virology , Royal Free Hospital School of Medicine , Pond Street , London NW3 20G , * and Medical Molecular Biology Unit , Department of Biochemistry , The Windeyer Building , University College and Middlesex School of Medicine , London WIP 6DB , `` England Received 1 November 1989/Accepted 20 March 1990 Two major protein-binding sites within the negative regulatory element of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 long terminal repeat have been identified .
One ( site B ) contained a palindromic sequence with homology to steroid/thyroid hormone response elements but was distinct from previously described binding sites of this class .
A novel T-cell protein recognized the palindromic sequence within site B and also bound estrogen- or thyroid hormone-response elements with lower affinity .
A 7-base-pair mutation in the site B palindrome , which destroyed protein binding , resulted in increased expression from the human immunodefi- ciency virus type 1 long terminal repeat in T cells .
Expression from the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 ( HIV-1 ) long terminal repeat ( LTR ) is known to be regulated by host cell parameters , such as T-lymphocyte activation ( 2 , 13 , 18 ) , lymphokine action ( 10 , 14 ) , and macrophage differentiation ( 8 ) .
These events have the potential to influence critically the progress of disease in infected individuals .
A number of cellular proteins capable of binding to the HIV-1 LTR have been identified ( 2 , 4 , 5 , 13 , 18 , 20 ) , and one of these , NFxB , binds to the enhancer region of the LTR and increases viral transcription in response to several stimuli ( 10 , 13 , 14 ) .
In contrast , however , the region of the LTR upstream of base -278 ( relative to the start of transcription ) has been identified as a negative regulatory element ( NRE ) , the removal of which increases LTR expression in the Jurkat T-cell line ( 19 ) .
A partial reconstitution of the repressive activity is observed when the -340 to -185 region is linked to a heterologous promoter ( 17 ) .
Furthermore , deletion of the -419 to -157 region from the LTR of HIV-1 produces a mutant which replicates more rapidly in cell culture ( 11 ) , suggesting that this region plays a role in the cellular control of viral replication .
The cellular proteins which interact with the NRE are therefore clearly of interest as potential transcriptional repressors .
Four previous reports have described protein-binding sites within the -419 to -157 region ( 4 , 5 , 18 , 20 ) , although their importance in HIV-1 LTR transcriptional regulation remains to be characterized .
Two of these studies identify binding sites for known inducible transcriptional activators of cellular genes , API ( 4 ) and NFAT1 ( 18 ) , and one identifies a binding site for a repressor of interleukin-2 receptor a-chain transcription ( 20 ) .
This suggests a potentially complex mechanism of regulation , involving a balance between positive and negative cellular factors binding to this region .
In this report we describe two further protein-binding sites within the HIV-1 LTR NRE which are * Corresponding author .
3234 recognized by previously undescribed human T-cell pro-teins .
We have characterized one of these proteins as related in binding specificity to steroid/thyroid hormone receptors and have demonstrated that it acts as a repressor of HIV-1 LTR-driven gene expression in T cells .
MATERIALS AND METHODS DNase I footprint analysis .
The NRE fragment was a Kpnl-to-Rsal fragment from HIV-HXB2 subcloned in Kpnrl-Smal-digested pUC13 and then labeled on the bottom strand by digestion of the polylinker with HindIII , phosphatasing , kinasing with [ P ?
PJATP , redigestion of the polylinker with EcoRI , and gel purification .
Nuclear extracts were prepared as described previously ( 3 ) , from Jurkat cells activated by incubation for 5 h with 5 ug of phytohemagglutinin per ml and 10 nM phorbolmyristylacetate , except that the cells were lysed in buffer A with 0.23 M sucrose .
Nuclei were then pelleted , washed once in the same buffer , and then lysed in buffer C containing 0.3 M NaCl .
Protease and phosphatase inhibitors were present in all buffers ( 15 ) .
Final extract protein concentrations were between 6 and 10 mg/ml .
DNase I footprinting assays ( 16 ) used 2 ng of NRE fragment , 10 pmol of 30-base-pair competitor oligonucleotide ( sequence -362 to -383 [ site A ] and -327 to -358 [ site BJ ) , and 5 pug of poly ( dI - dC ) ( Pharmacia ) incubated with 40 ug of Jurkat extract in 20 mM HEPES ( N-2-hydroxyethylpiperazine-N'-2-ethanesulfonic acid ) ( pH 7.9 ) , 2 mM MgCl , , 50 mM NaCl , 1 mM dithiothreitol , and 20 % glycerol on ice for 45 min before DNase I digestion .
Gel retardation assays .
A 10-fmol portion of reverse tran-scription-labeled NRE fragment or oligonucleotide was incubated with 1.25 pg of Jurkat T-cell extract on ice for 45 min in 20 mM HEPES ( pH 7.9 ) -1 mM MgCl , -50 mM NaCl-4 % Ficoll-5 ug of poly ( dI - dC ) with competitor as indicated and then separated on a 4 % 0.25 % TBE-acryl-amide gel .
Methylation interference analysis .
Labeled NRE fragment PROTEIN-BINDING SITES IN THE NRE OF HIV-1 LTR 3235 E aaﬁgggo b A B vam _39-| -- -- 4 [ T < Z |_320 we CAAGGCTACTTCCCTGAT TAGCAGAACTACACACCAGGGCCAGGGGTICAGATATCCACTGACCTTTGGATGG GTTCCGATGAAGGGACTAMTCGTC IGATGTGTGGTCPOGGTCCOCPGTCTATAGGTGACTGGAAACETAOC I * ® ® I B « 0 % I « b @ : zsass s u wa # 4 f - # 4 231A i L io it ; We `` * % -- % % go -4|* « s _ T m a as wo th ‘ am aun onn ws cnn ~A04424 % .
FIG .
1 .
DNase I footprinting of the HIV-1 LTR NRE .
( a ) Lane A , no protein ; lanes B through E , labeled NRE fragment incubated with Jurkat T-cell nuclear extract .
Lane B , no competitor oligonucleotide ; lane C , site A oligonucleotide ; lane D , site B oligonucleotide ; lane E , sites A and B oligonucleotides as competitors .
A Maxam and Gilbert G reaction ( 12 ) of the NRE fragment used as a marker is labeled G. ( b ) Extent of the DNase I footprint on each strand is shown .
The patterns of methylation interference of the lower-mobility complex of Fig .
2 over site A ( data not shown ) and the higher-mobility complex of Fig .
2 over site B ( from Fig .
5 ) are also depicted .
was methylated by using dimethyl sulfate such that , on average , one G residue per molecule was modified and then was run in a DNA mobility shift assay scaled up 10-fold and including 6 ug of pBR322 DNA .
The band eliminated by competition with the site B oligonucleotide was recovered from the gel and the DNA was purified , cleaved by using piperidine ( 12 ) , and analyzed on a sequencing gel .
CAT assays .
Reporter plasmids were LTR-CAT ( 13 ) and BMS LTR-CAT containing the 7-base-pair BMS mutation .
To construct BMS LTR-CAT , a 42-base-pair oligonucleotide homologous to the HIV-1 LTR but containing a central 7-base-pair BMS mutation ( see Fig .
4a ) was used in site-directed mutagenesis of a 557-base-pair Kprnl-to-Sacl fragment of HIV-HXB2 subcloned in M13 .
This fragment was sequenced and then substituted in LTR-CAT .
Plasmids were quantitated first by measurement of optical density at 280 nm ( OD ; s , ) and then on an ethidium bromide-stained agarose gel .
A total of 2 x 10 `` Jurkat-TAT cells were transfected by incubation with plasmid and 300 g of DEAE-dextran per ml for 1 h. After 48 h , chloramphenicol acetyltransferase ( CAT ) enzyme activity was measured for 1 h. Similar results of duplicate transfections were obtained with three independent plasmid preparations of LTR-CAT and BMS LTR-CAT ( see Fig .
7 ) .
RESULTS To characterize major host cell proteins interacting with the upstream NRE of the HIV-1 LTR , we carried out DNase I footprint analysis by using a fragment containing bases -456 to -300 from the HXBH2 LTR and nuclear extract from Jurkat T cells , which are permissive for HIV-1 infec-tion .
This fragment was selected to contain the NRE as defined in both resting and activated T cells ( 19 ) but to lack A B C D E F 80 088 w u % FIG .
2 .
DNA mobility shift assay of the NRE fragment using Jurkat T-cell nuclear extract .
Lane A , no competitor ; lane B , site A oligonucleotide ; lane C , site B oligonucleotide ; lane D , API oligo- nucleotide ; lane E , octamer oligonucleotide ; lane F , pBR322 ( all added in 100-fold molar excess ) .
3236 ORCHARD ET AL .
a A BC D E F G H pA BC D E - nome ome oms M00 ut itt _ w a gf 'FIG .
3 .
Further characterization of site B .
( a ) DNA mobility shift assay with labeled site B oligonucleotide and Jurkat T-cell extract .
Lanes A and B , No competitor ; lane C , site B oligonucleotide ; lane D , thyroid hormone response element ; lane E , site A ; lane F , simian virus 40 enhancer API site ; lane G , simian virus 40 enhancer AP2 site ; lane H , pBR322 competition at 100-fold excess .
All extracts were from activated Jurkat cells except track A ( nonactivated Jurkat cell extract ) .
( b ) Activated Jurkat T-cell extract was incubated for 30 min on ice with 0.8 % deoxycholate and 0.5 % Brij ( lanes B through D ) before a DNA mobility shift assay with no competitor ( lanes A and B ) , or 100-fold excess of site B oligonucleotide ( lane C ) , API oligonucleotide ( lane D ) , or octamer oligonucleotide ( lane E ) .
the binding site for the potential positive regulatory factor NFAT1 present in such cells ( 2 , 18 ) .
Figure la ( lane B ) shows that two footprints were detectable within this fragment with extract from activated Jurkat cells .
These are located at -379 to -361 ( site A ) and -350 to -327 ( site B ) and are represented diagrammatically in Fig .
1b on both strands ( data for the bottom strand is not shown ) .
Each of these footprints was eliminated specifically when a 100-fold excess of 30-base-pair oligonucleotides spanning the appropriate binding site was included in the assay ( Fig .
la , lanes C and D ) , while competition with both sites ( lane E ) resulted in a DNase I cutting pattern indistinguishable from that in the absence of nuclear extract .
Unrelated oligonucle- J. ViroL .
otides had no effect on the footprint at either site , and a similar footprint was observed when extract from nonactivated Jurkat cells was used ( data not shown ) .
Although the footprint over each of these sites was not eliminated by competition with the oligonucleotide from the other site , it is noteworthy that a DNase I-hypersensitive site at the border of site B ( arrowhead in Fig .
la , lane D ) was enhanced in the presence of the site A footprint when the site B footprint had been specifically eliminated .
In addition , there was a much enhanced site B footprint ( lane C ) and associated hypersensitivity ( arrow in lane C ) when site A was eliminated .
These data suggest some potential interaction between the two sites .
In a DNA mobility shift assay using the same NRE fragment , two low-mobility bands were observed ( Fig .
2 , lane A ) .
As expected , one of these bands ( that with the lower mobility ) was specifically eliminated by competition by the site A oligonucleotide ( lane B ) , while the other was similarly eliminated by competition with a site B oligonucleotide ( lane C ) .
This is in agreement with the methylation interference pattern obtained over site B with the higher-mobility complex ( Fig .
1b ) and that obtained over site A with the lower-mobility complex ( data not shown ) .
Hence , these two sites represent the major binding sites for T-cell factors within the NRE .
Minor bands which are potential degradation products were also competed by site B ; neither band was eliminated by competition with an unrelated sequence ( lane F ) .
Inspection of the sequence of site A ( Fig .
1b ) revealed a homology with the octamer element , which binds the ubiquitous transcription factor OTF-1 ; however , neither complex is competed by an oligonucleotide containing a consensus octamer sequence ( lane E ) .
An oligonucleotide related to the site B region , but with multiple sequence changes , has been reported to bind the cellular transcription factor API ( 4 ) , but an oligonucleotide containing an API-binding site failed to compete for either complex ( lane D ) .
In view of the strong footprint and mobility shift given by site B , we decided to initially characterize the protein binding to site B .
To do this , we performed DNA mobility shift analyses with a site B oligonucleotide .
This revealed a single major DNA-protein complex with a nuclear extract from activated Jurkat cells ( Fig .
3a , lane B ) which was eliminated by competition with an unlabeled site B oligonucleotide ( Fig .
3a , lane C ) but not with site A oligonucleotide ( Fig .
3a , lane E ) or plasmid ( Fig .
3a , lane H ) .
We have also a SITE B ERE TRE SITE B TCGACAGGGGTCAGATATCCACTGACCTTC o 5s « 0 ¢°i\0 39 so « 0° aﬂp g9 g0 { 301,00 a > « -~ * le `` me hater : saw TRE : CGATCGTGCGGTCACGTCCCIGATCTTACCTTTCCA ERE : CTAGAAAGTCAGGTCACAGTGACCTGATCAAT GRE CTAGAAAGTCAGAACACAGTGTTCTGATCAAT BMS TCGACACACTAGCGATATCCACTGACCTTC BM3 : TCGACAGGGGITCAGATATCCACGCTAGTGC FIG .
4 .
The relationship of site B to hormone response elements .
( a ) Comparison of the sequence of site B with oligonucleotides containing a TRElsequence from the rat growth hormone promoter and an ERE sequence from the Xenopus vitellogenin A2 promoter .
( b ) Gel retardation analysis using activated Jurkat cell extract , labeled site B oligonucleotide , and the excess unlabeled oligonucleotide indicated .
Vor .
64 , 1990 detected a complex with a similar mobility in an extract from nonactivated Jurkat cells ( Fig .
3a , lane A ) and in resting and stimulated peripheral blood lymphocytes and HeLa cells ( data not shown ) , suggesting that this protein is ubiquitously expressed .
The site B sequence is related to the consensus binding sites for the cellular transcription factors AP1 and AP2 .
However , the binding to the site B oligonucleotide was not eliminated by competition with oligonucleotides containing the simian virus 40 enhancer API or AP ?
sites ( Fig .
3a , tracks F and G ) ; therefore , these are not the predominant proteins binding to site B in activated T cells .
Indeed , an antiserum to human fos protein , which decreased the mobility of an API complex , had no effect on the mobility of the site B complex ( data not shown ) .
An intriguing characteristic of the site B complex is shown in Fig .
3b .
Treatment of protein extracts with deoxycholate and Brij , a combination of detergents which would usually disrupt multiprotein complexes , leading to increased mobil-ity , surprisingly resulted in a marked decrease in mobility of the site B complex ( Fig .
3b , lane B ) .
This lower-mobility band showed the same specificity of competition as the site B complex ( Fig .
3b , lanes C through E ) .
The site B-binding protein therefore undergoes a characteristic conformational change or complex formation in the presence of these detergents .
We observed in our initial competition experiments that site B binding was partially eliminated by competition with a 100-fold excess of synthetic oligonucleotide from the growth hormone promoter ( Fig .
3a , lane D ) .
Upon inspection of the site B sequence ( Fig .
4a ) , a 6-base-pair palindrome with a 7-base-pair spacing can be identified ( underlined in Fig 4a ) , which is homologous to a palindromic element recognized by the thyroid hormone receptor ( TRE ) within the growth hormone promoter ( Fig .
4a ) .
In the growth hormone pro-moter , this is a 5-base-pair palindrome with a 6-base-pair spacing .
Consideration of further steroid response elements led to the observation that the estrogen receptor recognition site ( ERE ) also has considerable homology with site B .
This is a 5-base-pair palindrome with a 3-base-pair spacing ( Fig .
4a ) .
We therefore measured the affinity of interaction of the site B-binding protein with TRE- or ERE-containing oligo-nucleotides .
The ERE was recognized with an approximately threefold-lower affinity than site B itself , and the TRE was recognized with an approximately 20-fold-lower affinity ( Fig .
4b ) .
A glucocorticoid response element , which has a much lower homology to site B , failed to compete for site B binding ( data not shown ) .
The ability of both the TRE- and ERE-containing oligonucleotides to compete for site B binding suggested that the homologous palindromic sequence present in site B might be that recognized by the protein .
To investigate this , methylation interference analysis was performed on the site B complex , which revealed a symmetrical pattern of interference ( Fig .
1b and 5 ) identical to that observed by others studying binding to the TRE or ERE .
The site B protein may therefore be related to the steroid/thyroid hormone receptor family , binding with maximal affinity to a palindromic sequence with a longer spacer element .
To confirm that the palindromic sequence in site B was important for protein binding , mutations were introduced which destroyed either the 5 ' or 3 ' half of the palindrome ( BMS and BM3 , respectively ; Fig .
4a ) .
The BMS oligonucleotide failed to form a protein complex , while the BM3 oligonucleotide formed only a very weak specific protein complex , of slightly lower mobility than that formed with the unmutated site B ( Fig .
6a ) .
These mutations also reduced the PROTEIN-BINDING SITES IN THE NRE OF HIV-1 LTR 3237 A B c b =v Bee # 0 ume & a # ws dak < | * y `` WB cme 3 i a * as ltt uke @ # s : s *C o « * `` > wp like 4 an UB ma @ B as F wan .
€HD ces % it FIG .
5 .
Methylation interference on the NRE complex eliminated by competition with site B ( Fig .
2 ) .
Lanes A and B , NRE fragment labeled on the bottom strand ; lanes C and D , NRE fragment labeled on the top strand ; either unbound DNA ( lanes B and C ) or DNA recovered from the protein-DNA complex .
Arrows indicate reduction in intensity of a band associated with the complex .
Representation of the methylation interference patterns of sites A ( data not shown ) and B are compared with the extent of the footprints in Fig .
1b .
ability of unlabeled oligonucleotides to compete for binding of the T-cell protein to site B , in comparison to unmutated site B ( Fig .
6b , BMS and BM3 lanes ) .
It is noteworthy that mutation of the 5 ' half of the palindrome decreased binding affinity much more severely ( a 100-fold decrease in affinity compared with a fourfold decrease in affinity ) , suggesting that this part of the element is more important for protein complex formation .
Similar hierarchical binding to halves of a palindrome has been described for the glucocorticoid receptor responsive element ( 21 ) and may indicate that the sequences flanking the palindrome are important in the binding interaction .
Identification of the BMS mutation , a 7-base-pair change which abolished protein interaction , allowed the effect of the protein/site B interaction on HIV-1 LTR transcription to be measured .
The BMS mutation was introduced into the plasmid LTR-CAT , which was then transfected into Jurkat cells expressing HIV-1 TAT protein so that the basal level of LTR expression could be readily detected .
A comparison of BMS LTR-CAT expression with that of the wild-type LTR CAT is shown in Fig .
7 ; an approximately twofold increase in expression from the BMS LTR was seen with a range of plasmid concentrations .
This result was obtained with three 3238 ORCHARD ET AL .
SITE B BM3 BMS A B C D EF G H I| J|K L M N O b « in PROBE a 0 > @ a 0 BMS 0 0 o o 6 .
% W0 57° Ns « 0 W0 s .o W0 ( 9° \0°r§ ’ BM3 : P060 FIG .
6 .
Effect of mutations in the site B palindrome on protein binding .
( a ) Mobility shift assays using labeled site B , BM3 , or BMS oligonucleotides as indicated above lanes and no competitor ( lanes A , F , and K ) , unlabeled site B oligonucleotide ( lanes B , G , and L ) , BMS oligonucleotide ( lanes C , H , and M ) , BM3 oligonucleotide ( lanes D , I , and N ) , or API oligonucleotide ( lanes E , J , and O ) at 100-fold molar excess .
( b ) Labeled site B oligonucleotide with the fold excess of the unlabeled competitor oligonucleotide indicated above the lanes .
independent plasmid preparations of both BMS LTR-CAT and LTR-CAT in the monocytic cell line U937 and in activated Jurkat cells ( data not shown ) .
The protein inter acting with site B therefore acts as a weak repressor of the LTR .
DISCUSSION In this report , we have identified two regions of the HIV-1 LTR NRE which lie between -323 and -383 and which interact with previously uncharacterized proteins present in human T cells .
Both of the elements that we have defined are conserved in all sequenced strains of HIV-1 ; part of this conservation can be ascribed to the fact that these elements lie within the coding region for the HIV regulatory protein nef .
However , base 3 conservation in nef codons suggests that they are also conserved as LTR elements .
Mutation of the binding site ( site B ) for one factor resulted in a two- to three-fold increase in LTR activity , identifying this protein as a weak repressor of HIV-1 LTR-driven gene expression .
We are currently extending this analysis to the site A J. ViroL .
< e LJ © # % © A @ # € ® & 1285 .
2s .. : s .
1 2 A25 256. s J 2 .
2 ham [ C. ith ... acd BMS LTR-CAT LTR-CAT 11 17 31 40 32 9 1C 11 16 17 FIG .
7 .
Expression of HIV-1 LTR CAT with a mutated site B. LTR CAT or BMS LTR CAT in the amounts indicated below the lanes were introduced into Jurkat TAT cells by DEAE-dextran-mediated transfection .
After 48 h , CAT activity was measured ; the percent conversion values ( bottom ) were calculated by counting the corresponding areas of the plate and are the means of duplicate parallel transfections .
protein , which footprint analysis suggests interacts with the site B protein ( Fig .
la ) .
In previous studies , a region containing site B has been reported to have a threefold negative effect on HIV-1 LTR-driven gene expression ( 19 ) , and it is probable , therefore , that binding to site B contributes to this effect .
However , the negative regulatory region in another study lies downstream of -340 ( 17 ) , containing only part of site B , and the negative effect in this case must therefore involve further cellular factors binding to this adjacent region .
In the intact , integrated LTR such proteins may interact with the site B binding protein in a manner similar to that of the site A protein .
The identification of a putative hormone receptor palindromic element with a novel spacing provides several potential mechanisms for negative regulation at site B .
Thus , although the palindrome we have defined bears a close relationship to the similar elements in the TRE and ERE , it differs from these in the spacing between the two halves of the palindrome ( Fig .
4a ) .
In the case of the site B palindrome , this spacing is 7 base pairs , whereas TREs possess a 6-base-pair spacing or are contiguous , while EREs have a 3-base-pair spacing .
Such differences are of particular significance in that previous studies have shown that the thyroid hormone receptor can repress transcription from binding sites with an extended spacing ( 6 ) .
Similarly , this receptor has been reported to repress expression via a retinoic acid receptor-binding site in the absence of ligand ( 7 ) .
Moreover an alternatively spliced form of the thyroid hormone receptor has been defined which lacks the ligand-binding domain and dominantly represses gene expression ( 9 ) .
It is possible , therefore , that the site B-binding protein may act similarly to repress HIV-1 gene expression , either because it is not a ligand-binding protein or because its specific ligand is absent in our experiments .
The sequence specificity of the site B-binding protein and its pattern of expression indicate that it is not a previously characterized protein .
Analysis of the precise relationship of this protein to the steroid/thyroid hormone receptor family must await further study .
The role of this protein in the regulation of HIV-1 gene expression , and potentially in the regulation of specific cellular genes , suggests that such a study would be of interest .
Vor .
64 , 1990 PROTEIN-BINDING SITES IN THE NRE OF HIV-1 LTR 3239 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The contributions of the first two authors to this study were equivalent .
We thank Robin Weiss for critical reading of the manuscript , Malcolm Parker for ERE/GRE oligonucleotides , Jonathan Karn for the TAT retroviral vector , and Lawrence Pearl for sequence analysis .
This work was supported by the AIDS Directed Programme of the Medical Research Council and the Cancer Research Campaign .
LITERATURE CITED 1 .
Beato , M. 1989 .
Gene regulation by steroid hormones .
Cell 56:335-344 .
2 .
Bohnlein , E. , J. W. Lowenthal , M. Siekevitz , D. W. Ballard , B. R. Franza , and W. C. Greene .
1988 .
The same inducible nuclear protein regulates mitogen activation of both the interleukin-2 receptor-alpha gene and type 1 HIV .
Cell 53:827-836 .
2 .
Dignam , J. D. , R. M. Lebowitz , and R. G. Roeder .
1983 .
Accurate transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II in a soluble extract from isolated mammalian nuclei .
Nucleic Acids Res .
11:1475-1489 .
4 .
Franza , B. R. , F. J. Rauscher , S. F. Josephs , and T. Curran .
1988 .
The Fos complex and Fos-related antigens recognize sequence elements that contain AP-1 binding sites .
Science 239:1150-1153 .
5 .
Garcia , J .
A. , F. K. Wu , R. Mitsuyasu , and R. B. Gaynor .
1987 .
Interactions of cellular proteins involved in the transcriptional regulation of the human immunodeficiency virus .
EMBO J .
6:3761-3770 .
6 .
Glass , C. K. , J. M. Holloway , O. V. Devary , and M. G. Rosenfeld .
1988 .
The thyroid hormone receptor binds with opposite transcriptional effects to a common sequence motif in thyroid hormone and estrogen response elements .
Cell 54 : 313-323 .
7 .
Graupner , G. , K. N. Wills , M. Tzukerman , X. Zhang , and M. Pfahl .
1989 .
Dual regulatory role for thyroid-hormone receptors allows control of retinoic acid receptor activity .
Nature ( London ) 340:653-656 .
8 .
Griffin , G. E. , K. Leung , T. M. Folks , S. Kundel , and G. J. Nabel .
1989 .
Activation of HIV gene expression during mono-cyte differentiation by induction of NF-xB .
Nature ( London ) 339:70-73 .
9 .
Koenig , R. J. , M. A. Lazar , R. A. Hodin , G. A. Brent , P. R. Larsen , W. W. Chin , and D. D. Moore .
1989 .
Inhibition of thyroid hormone action by a non-hormone binding c-erbA protein generated by alternative mRNA splicing .
Nature ( London ) 337:659-661 .
10 .
Lowenthal , J. W. , D. W. Ballard , E. Bohnlein , and W. C. 11 .
12 .
13 .
14 .
15 .
16 .
17 .
18 .
19 .
20 .
21 .
Greene .
1989 .
Tumor necrosis factor a induces proteins that bind specifically to kB-like enhancer elements and regulate interleukin 2 receptor « -chain gene expression in primary human T-lymphocytes .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 86:2331-2335 .
Lu , Y. , M. Stenzel , J. G. Sodroski , and W. A. Haseltine .
1989 .
Effects of long terminal repeat mutations on human immunodeficiency virus type 1 .
J. Virol .
63:4115-4119 .
Maxam , A. M. , and W. Gilbert .
1980 .
Sequencing end-labeled DNA with base-specific chemical cleavage .
Methods Enzymol .
65:499-560 .
Nabel , G. , and D. Baltimore .
1987 .
An inducible transcription factor activates expression of human immunodeficiency virus in T cells .
Nature ( London ) 326:711-713 .
Osborn , L. , S. Kunkel , and G. J. Nabel .
1989 .
Tumor necrosis factor and interleukin 1 stimulate the human immunodeficiency virus enhancer by activation of the nuclear factor kB .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 86:2336-2340 .
Perkins , N. D. , R. H. Nicolas , M. A. Plumb , and G. H. Goodwin .
1989 .
The purification of an erythroid protein which binds to enhancer and promoter elements of haemoglobin genes .
Nucleic Acids Res .
17:1299-1314 .
Plumb , M. A. , V. V. Lobanenkov , R. H. Nicolas , C. A. Wright , S. Zavou , and G. H. Goodwin .
1986 .
Characterization of chicken erythroid nuclear proteins which bind to the nuclease hypersensitive regions upstream of the *- and -globin genes .
Nucleic Acids Res .
14:7675-7693 .
Rosen , C. A. , J. G. Sodroski , and W. A. Haseltine .
1985 .
The location of cis-acting regulatory sequences in the human T cell lymphotropic virus type III ( HTLV-III/LAV ) long terminal repeat .
Cell 41:813-823 .
Shaw , J.-P. , P. J. Utz , D. B. Durand , J. J. Toole , E. A. Emmel , and G. R. Crabtree .
1988 .
Identification of a putative regulator of early T cell activation genes .
Science 241:202-205 .
Sickevitz , M. , S. F. Josephs , M. Dukovich , N. Peffer , F. Wong-Staal , and W. C. Greene .
1987 .
Activation of the HIV-1 LTR by T cell mitogens and the trans-activator protein of HTLV-1 .
Science 238:1575-1578 .
Smith , M. R. , and W. C. Greene .
1989 .
The same 50-kDa cellular protein binds to the negative regulatory elements of the interleukin-2 receptor o-chain gene and the HIV-1 LTR .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 86:8526-8530 .
Tsai , S. Y. , D. J. Carlstedt , N. L. Weigel , K. Dahlman , J .
A. Gustafsson , M. J. Tsai , and B. W. O'Malley .
1988 .
Molecular interactions of steroid hormone receptor with its enhancer element : evidence for receptor dimer formation .
Cell 55:361-369 .
