From www .
bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
Retroviral Mediated Transfer and Expression of Exogenous Genes in Primary Lymphoid Cells : Assaying for a Viral Transactivator Activity in Normal and Malignant Cells By Roger K. Strair , Murray Towle , Peter W. Heald , and Brian R. Smith In this report we describe the use of recombinant retroviruses to characterize the activity of an exogenous promoter in primary cells obtained from patients with lymphoproliferative disorders .
The infection of a variety of cultured and primary lymphoid cells with a recombinant retrovirus containing a histone promoter-driven 3-galactosidase gene is shown to result in the expression of B-galactosidase in 50 % to 100 % of the cells .
A similar infection with a recombinant retrovirus containing the B-galactosi- ECOMBINANT retroviruses have been widely used for the transfer and analysis of a variety of genes .
The availability of amphotropic and ecotropic packaging cell lines capable of producing high titers of defective recombinant retroviruses has made it possible to transfer genes efficiently into primary cells .
Several investigators have described the efficient expression of a variety of genes in primary hematopoietic cells . '
'' Furthermore , recombinant retroviruses have been used to express genes in cells derived from primary lymphoid , hepatic , endothelial , and fibroblast cells , * `` Recombinant retroviruses have been used not only to achieve high levels of expression of foreign genes , but also to analyze promoter function in cultured cells .
One example is the use of a recombinant retrovirus containing a selectable marker gene driven by a adenovirus 5 E2 promoter to assess the level of expression of the selectable marker as a function of chromosomal integration site and the presence or absence of the adenovirus 5 Ela-encoded `` transactivator `` polypep-tides . ``
Another example is the use of recombinant retroviruses containing the TnS neo gene with an adenovirus E2 promoter to obtain efficient transfer of G418 resistance to cultured cells containing Ela-encoded polypeptides whereas cells lacking the polypeptides only infrequently became G418 resistant .
In this report we describe a model system that extends the use of recombinant retroviruses to the study of promoter function in primary cells obtained from normal individuals and patients .
Since it is often difficult to transfect DNA efficiently into primary cells we have used recombinant retroviruses to transfer marker genes containing promoters to be studied .
In contrast to transfection , the use of recombinant retroviruses permits gene transfer into 50 % to 100 % of primary lymphoid cells without selection .
In these studies we used the Escherichia coli B-galactosidase gene as a marker gene because it can be quantitatively assayed on a single cell basis , allowing the assay of marker gene activity in subsets of cells in a mixed primary cell population .
The use of this system does not subject the primary cells to either prolonged cell culture or to antibiotic selection , circumstances that might significantly alter the biology of the cells .
As an example of this type of analysis we describe the use of a recombinant retrovirus containing a B-galactosidase gene with an adenovirus E2 promoter to analyze the activity of the E2 promoter in lymphocytes from normal donors as Blood , Vol 76 , No 6 ( September 15 ) , 1990 : pp 1201-1208 dase gene with an adenovirus E2 promoter , results in B-galactosidase activity in a limited number of cultured and primary cells .
Since the adenovirus E2 promoter has been well characterized and is known to be regulated by transactivators encoded by many viruses , the activity of this promoter in specific cell types is discussed in reference to both the biology of the cell and the possible presence of as yet undetected viral gene products .
© 1990 by The American Society of Hematology .
well as patients with a variety of lymphoproliferative disorders .
This promoter was selected because it is highly induc-ible by the adenovirus Ela-encoded 289 amino acid polypeptide .
In addition , `` transactivator `` polypeptides encoded by a broad spectrum of viruses including adenoviruses , human papilloma virus , pseudorabies virus , and some human T-cell lymphotropic viruses will increase the expression of genes driven by the adenovirus E2 promoter .
'* `` In the absence of apparent viral transactivators , this promoter is efficiently expressed in undifferentiated embryonic cells and embryonal carcinoma cell lines . ``
'' Therefore , the expression of genes containing this promoter is dependent on transactivator activity that is either encoded by viral genes or tightly regulated cellular genes .
This transactivator activity has been termed `` Ela-like `` activity . ``
** `` The ability to assay for the activity of E2 promoter-driven marker genes in primary cells from patients allows several important issues related to the biology of both the cells and the E2 promoter to be addressed , including the spectrum of cells capable of expressing the E2 promoter and the relationship between the level of expression and the conditions of cell growth .
Perhaps more importantly , applying this assay to cells from patients with lymphoproliferative disorders could yield useful information about the biology of these disorders .
Furthermore , the same technique may prove useful in the analysis of a variety of promoters in different primary cell types .
From the Departments of Internal Medicine , Laboratory Medicine and Dermatology ; Yale University School of Medicine , New Haven , CT .
Submitted February 15 , 1990 ; accepted May 23 , 1990 .
Supported in part by the American Cancer Society ( Clinical Oncology Career Development Award ) ( R.K.S . )
and the National Cancer Institute ( R29CA49407 ) .
B.R.S .
is a Scholar of the Leukemia Society of America .
Address reprint requests to Roger Strair , MD , PhD , Division of Medical Oncology , Yale University School of Medicine , 333 Cedar St , New Haven , CT 06510 .
The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge payment .
This article must therefore be hereby marked `` advertisement `` in accordance with 18 U.S.C .
section 1734 solely to indicate this fact .
© 1990 by The American Society of Hematology .
0006-497 1/90/7606-0022 $ 3.00/0 1201 From www .
bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
1202 MATERIALS AND METHODS Materials .
All restriction and DNA modifying enzymes were purchased from New England Biolabs , Beverly , MA .
Production of recombinant retroviruses .
- Recombinant retroviral DNAs were constructed as modifications of previously described plasmids . ``
'' `` `` `` Retroviruses containing the E coli -galactosidase gene sequences were constructed from the enhancer-deleted HSG-neo plasmid described by Guild et al . ``
'' HSG-neo was digested with BamHI , excising the Tn5 neo gene , and the E coli B-galactosidase gene was inserted , generating a retroviral vector plasmid with an internal histone H4 promoter 5 ' to the E coli B-galactosidase gene .
To generate a similar plasmid containing the adenovirus E2 promoter , HSG-neo was digested with Xho I and BamHI and a -galactosidase gene driven by the E2 promoter was inserted in place of the histone H4 promoter-Tn5 neo gene .
The resultant retroviral vector plasmid contains an internal E2 promoter 5 ' to the B-galactosidase gene .
Production of the recombinant retrovirus encoding the human CDS antigen has been previously described . ``
To generate cell lines producing recombinant retroviruses , amphotropic and ecotropic packaging cell lines* were cotransfected with the appropriate plasmid and PSV , neo as previously described .
Colonies were generated in Dulbecco 's Modified Eagle 's Medium ( DMEM ) supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum ( FCS ) and 1.0 mg/mL of G418 ( GIBCO , Grand Island , NY ) .
Individual colonies were isolated , expanded into cell lines , and assayed for the production of recombinant retroviruses by infection of NIH 3T3 cells as described previously .
`` `` * Infection of lymphocytes .
- Human lymphocytes were obtained by ficoll-hypaque density gradient separation of mononuclear cells from human blood .
Murine spleen cells were obtained by making a suspension of teased spleen cells followed by ficoll-hypaque density gradient separation .
For coculture experiments , 2 x 10° lymphocytes were suspended in 10 mL of DMEM supplemented with 10 % FCS and 2 ug/mL of polybrene .
Medium from a 25 % confluent 10-cm plate of cells producing recombinant retroviruses was removed and replaced by the lymphocyte suspension .
After 48 hours at 37°C , 5 % CO ; , the nonadherent cells were harvested , resuspended in RPMI 1640 ( GIBCO ) supplemented with 10 % FCS and incubated for an additional 24 hours at 37°C , 5 % CO , .
Lymphocytes were then harvested and assayed for marker gene expression as described below .
For optimum gene transfer efficiency , a mixture of amphotropic and ecotropic packaging cell lines producing the recombinant retrovirus were used .
Ninety-six hours before infection , the amphotropic and ecotropic packaging cell lines producing the recombinant retrovirus of interest were cocultured in the presence of 4 ug/ml of polybrene .
The night before the lymphocyte infection this combined amphotropic-ecotropic packaging cell line was split 1:15 into DMEM supplemented with 10 % FCS .
The following day the lymphocyte infection was performed as described above .
In some experiments human lymphocytes were propagated for an additional 14 days in culture using RPMI 1640 medium with 15 % FCS and 1 % conditioned medium ( obtained as supernatants from normal human lymphocytes stimulated for 72 hours with 5 ug/ml of phytohemag-glutinin [ PHA ] ) .
Assay of gene transfer .
To detect B-galactosidase activity in lymphocytes by light microscopy , infected cells were washed in DMEM and fixed and stained as described by Price et al . ``
The final staining solution contained 5 mmol/L of potassium ferricyanide , 5 mmol/L of potassium ferrocyanide , 1 mmol/L of MgCl , and 1 mg/mL of 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-3-p-galactopyranoside ( X-gal ) .
Detection of B-galactosidase activity by fluorescence and flow cytometry was accomplished by a modification of the procedure described by Nolan et al . ``
Lymphocytes were gently removed from the plate and washed in phosphate-buffered saline ( PBS ) pH 7.3 STRAIR ET AL with 10 mmol/L Hepes and 4 % FCS ( SM ) .
Approximately 10° cells in a volume of 0.1 mL were incubated in a 5-mL tube at 37°C for 10 minutes .
An equal volume of 37°C prewarmed 2 mmol/L fluorescein- ( FDG ) ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) in water was added , thoroughly mixed with cells , and incubated at 37°C for 1 minute .
The incubation was stopped by adding 1.8 mL of ice cold SM .
Cells were kept on ice and analyzed on a FACstar or FACscan instrument ( Becton-Dickinson , Mountain View , CA ) .
Assay of murine lymphocytes for expression of the human CD5 antigen was accomplished by labeling with phycoerythrin-conjugated mouse anti-human CDS ( Leu 1 , Becton-Dickinson ) followed by cell sorter analysis as previously described . ``
Control labeling with a murine phycoerythrin-conjugated Ig isotype-matched irrelevant monoclonal antibody ( MoAb ) was performed simultaneously .
Dual labeling of human lymphocytes was performed by first staining for FDG activity followed by direct immunofluorescence surface labeling with either phycoerythrin-conjugated anti-CD4 , anti-CD8 , or anti-CDS ( Becton-Dickinson ) .
For analysis all cells labeled for the particular surface marker were gated and a single parameter histogram of green fluorescence ( FDG staining ) obtained .
Clinical specimens .
- Lymphoid cells from normal human donors and patients with a variety of lymphoproliferative disorders were obtained from blood samples and processed as described above .
The three patients with acute lymphocytic leukemia ( ALL ) all had at least 80 % circulating malignant cells that were of pre-B-cell phenotype ( CALLA* ) .
The patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia ( CLL ) had greater than 90 % circulating CDS* monoclonal B cells .
The patient with Sezary cell leukemia had 90 % circulating malignant CD4* cells .
This patient had a prolonged history of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma with typical morphologic features in blood as well as skin .
RESULTS Efficient infection of primary lymphocytes .
- As a prerequisite to the analysis of E2 promoter activity it was necessary to define conditions that would allow efficient gene transfer into primary lymphoid cells .
Recombinant retroviruses were used because the ability to efficiently express exogenous genes in other primary cell types has been demonstrated .
To obtain a quantitative estimate of the efficiency of retroviral-mediated infection , the transfer of two marker genes was analyzed .
The first marker gene has been previously described `` and uses an enhancer-deleted recombinant retrovirus `` containing the histone H4 promoter immediately 5 to the human CDS antigen mRNA sequences .
Three days after infection murine lymphocytes are assayed for human CD5 expression by staining with anti-human CD5 antibody and analysis by flow cytometry .
The second marker system uses an enhancer-deleted recombinant retrovirus containing an internal histone H4 promoter immediately 5 ' to -galactosidase mRNA sequences .
Three days after infection lymphocytes are assayed for -galactosidase activity by staining with 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-3-p-galactopyranoside ( X-gal ) and visualization by light microscopy or by staining with FDG followed by flow cytometry analysis .
Using each of these recombinant retroviruses it is possible to establish conditions that allow the transfer and expression of the marker gene into 50 % to 100 % of primary murine or human lymphocytes .
Optimal conditions of gene transfer were obtained by coculturing primary lymphocytes for 48 hours with a mixture of ecotropic and amphotropic cell lines producing high titers ( > 10'/mL ) of the recombinant retrovi- From www .
bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
GENE TRANSFER INTO LYMPHOID CELLS rus .
After an additional 24 hours in culture the lymphocytes were assayed for expression of the marker gene .
Mitogenic stimulation of the cells did not improve the efficiency of gene transfer using these conditions .
Figure 1 demonstrates the efficient gene transfer obtained under these conditions .
To assure that the nonadherent cells being assayed were lymphocytes rather than cells from the packaging cell line , human cells were cocultured with either the mixed ecotropic-amphotropic packaging cell lines producing the 3-galactosidase virus or an ecotropic cell line producing the 3-galactosidase virus .
The harvested cells were stained simultaneously with both FDG ( green fluorescence ) and phycoerythrin-conjugated mouse anti-human CDS , CD4 , or CD8 MoAbs ( red fluorescence ) .
Approximately 70 % of the cells being assayed were CDS ® cells and analysis of the CDS* population as well as the analysis of CD4®* and CD8* cells demonstrated expression of -galactosidase in each of these subsets of cells after coculture with the mixed amphotropic-ecotropic packaging cell lines .
In contrast , no expression is seen in the cells cocultured with the ecotropic packaging line Control / infected Control / infected / 10° 10 ' 10 % 10° 10+ 1203 itself ( Fig 2 ) .
These results demonstrate that the majority of the cells being assayed are T cells and that both the CD4 and CD8 populations can be infected with the B-galactosidase retrovirus .
To assess the short-term stability of expression , infected lymphocytes were cultured for 14 additional days in mitogen-conditioned medium and assayed for B-galactosidase expression using FDG .
As can be seen in Fig 3 B-galactosidase expression is observed in a majority of cells at 17 days .
Although it is difficult to determine how many of the cells expressing B-galactosidase 3 days after infection have been stimulated by the mitogen-conditioned medium and continue to express -galactosidase for an additional 14 days , these results indicate that at least some of the cells staining shortly after infection are capable of stable expression of the recombinant retrovirus after mitogen stimulation .
Recombinant retroviruses containing the E Coli B-galactosidase gene with an adenovirus E2 promoter detect cell lines with `` Ela-like `` activity .
- An additional recombinant retrovirus used in these studies was an enhancer-deleted recombinant retrovirus containing an internal adenovirus E2 © .
@ .
« S Fig 1 .
Efficient retroviral-mediated infection and expression in primary lymphocytes .
Primary murine ( panel a ) or human ( panels b and c ) lymphocytes infected with recombinant retroviruses .
Primary lymphocytes were obtained , infected , and assayed as described in Materials and Methods .
( a ) Murine lymphocytes infected with the virus containing the CD5 mRNA sequences were stained with a phycoerythrin-conjugated anti-human CD5 MoAb and assayed for immunofluorescence using flow cytometry as previously described .
Cell number is displayed on the ordinate and relative immunofluorescence in arbitrary units is displayed on the abscissa .
Light lines are mock infected lymphocytes and dark lines are infected lymphocytes .
( b ) Human lymphocytes infected with the virus containing the H4 promoter adj to the 3-gal id mRNA seq Staining of inf d and control lymphocytes with FDG followed by fluorescence assay using FDG .
Cell number is displayed on the ordinate and relative fluorescence in arbitrary units is displayed on the abscissa .
Light lines are mock infected lymphocytes and dark lines are infected lymphocytes .
( c ) X-gal staining of control ( above ) and lymphocytes infected with the virus ining the H4 pr adj to the 3-gal idase mRNA seq ( above ) .
From www .
bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
1204 STRAIR ET AL 300 300 CD5 + CELL NUMBER 0 10° _ 10 !
102 109 CD4+ 300 CD8 + 10 !
102 109 _ o !
102 FL1 Fig 2 .
Human lymphocytes were cocultured with either the mixed amphotropic-ecotropic packaging lines producing the H4 promoter-3-galactosidase gene or with the ecotropic line producing the same retrovirus .
Nonadherent cells were harvested after 48 hours and after an additional 24 hours the lymphocytes were stained with both FDG and phycoerythrin-conjugated mouse anti-human CDS , CD4 , or CD8 MoAbs .
Each of the cell populations was analyzed separately using dual label flow cytometry .
( A ) CD5* cells analyzed for fluorescence after incubation with FDG .
( B ) CD4* cells .
( C ) A similar analysis with CD8* cells .
Light lines , cells cocultured with the ecotropic packaging cell line ; dark lines , cells cocultured with the mixed amphotropic-ecotropic packaging cell line .
Cell number is displayed on the ordinate and relative fluorescence is displayed on the abscissa .
promoter adjacent to the B-galactosidase sequences .
Packaging cell lines producing high titers of each of these viruses were generated and used for infections as described above .
The two retroviruses encoding B-galactosidase ( driven by either a histone H4 promoter or an adenovirus E2 promoter ) were used to infect NIH 3T3 cells and NIH 3T3 cells stably expressing the Ela-encoded 289 amino acid `` transactivator `` 300 CELL NUMBER 0 L | 10° - ao !
104 _ 10 % FL1 Fig 3 .
- Human lymphocytes were infected with the retrovirus containing the histone H4 gene .
Nonadherent cells were harvested and placed in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10 % FCS and 1 % conditioned medium obtained by PHA treatment of normal lymphocytes .
Medium was changed every 3 days until day 14 when the lymphocytes were isolated , stained with FDG , and analyzed using flow cytometry .
Cell number is displayed on the ordinate and relative fluorescence is displayed on the abscissa .
Light line , mock infected lymphocytes ; dark line , infected lymphocytes .
10+ polypeptide .
Three days after infection cells were assayed for -galactosidase activity using the fluorescence cytometric assay .
As can be seen in Fig 4 , wild type 3T3 cells infected with the recombinant retrovirus containing the E2 promoter contain little if any B-galactosidase activity whereas 3T3 cells containing the Ela 289 amino acid polypeptide have a higher amount of B-galactosidase activity .
In contrast , the recombinant retrovirus containing the histone H4 promoter adjacent to the -galactosidase cDNA results in high levels of B-galactosidase activity in either cell type ( data not shown ) .
This experiment demonstrates preferential expression of the virus in cells with `` Ela activity . ``
The ability of the virus containing the E2 promoter to express in the cells containing the E1 A-encoded polypeptide assures that the titer of the viral preparation is sufficiently high to achieve infection of the wild type 3T3 cells .
In fact , titration of the histone promoter containing virus and the E2 promoter containing virus on 3T 3 cells containing the Ela-encoded polypeptide and on a human cell line , C8166 ( see below ) , indicates nearly identical titers of the two packaging cell lines .
A similar analysis was performed by coculture of several cell lines with packaging cell lines producing each of the recombinant retroviruses described above .
Figure 5 shows an analysis of Jurkatt , PBALL , and C8166 cells cocultured with the packaging cell lines expressing the E2-B-galactosidase virus .
As can be seen Jurkatt and PBALL cells infected with the retrovirus containing the E2 promoter do not express B-galactosidase activity whereas B-galactosidase activity is easily detected in C8166 cells infected with the E2 virus .
Use of recombinant retroviruses to detect `` El A-like `` activity in normal and abnormal primary lymphoid cells .
The ability to transfer and analyze the AB-galactosidase constructs with recombinant retroviruses allows the applica- From www .
bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
GENE TRANSFER INTO LYMPHOID CELLS A 3T3 B 3T3-EIA L O | 2 .
3 10 10 10 10 10 Fig 4 .
- Infection of NIH 3T3 cells and NIH 3T3 cells constitutively expressing the E1A 289 amino acid polypeptide with a recombinant retrovirus containing the A-galactosidase mRNA sequences adjacent to the adenovirus E2 promoter .
( A ) Wild type 3T3 cells were infected with the recombinant retrovirus .
Virus for these infections was obtained by harvesting supernatants from cocultures of amphotropic and ecotropic packaging cell lines .
Cells were exposed to the supernatants for 4 hours .
Seventy-two hours after infection cells were assayed for B-galactosidase activity using the FDG assay .
Light lines , control cells ; heavy lines , infected cells .
( B ) The same experiment performed with NIH 3T3 cells constitutively expressing the E1A 289 amino acid polypeptide . ``
4 tion of these assays to primary cells .
Figure 6 shows that primary lymphocytes obtained from a normal donor contain B-galactosidase activity after infection with the virus containing the histone promoter but not after infection with the virus containing the E2 promoter .
Similar analyses were performed on primary lymphoid cells from patients with lymphoproliferative disorders .
For example , Fig 6 also shows that malignant lymphoid cells from a patient with ALL do not express @ -galactosidase after infection with the E2-containing virus whereas malignant lymphocytes from a 1205 patient with Sezary syndrome do .
The fact that both patients express B-galactosidase after infection with the virus containing the histone promoter implies that the differences are not due to differences in infection efficiency .
Before the description of the fluorescence assay for B-galactosidase activity , similar infections were performed with lymphocytes from two patients with ALL and three patients with CLL .
However , detection of -galactosidase activity in those studies was done by staining with 5-bromo-4-chloro-3- A Jurkatt 10 Fig 5 .
Cell lines assayed after coculture with packaging cell lines producing the E2- # -galactosidase virus .
The indicated cell lines were cocultured with producer cell lines as described in the text .
Three days after infection the cells were assayed for B-galactosidase activity using the FDG assay , as described in Materials and Methods .
Light line , control cells ; heavy line , infected cells .
From www .
bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
1206 A LYMPHS E2 H4 / Control L 1 L 0° 0 !
102 10° 10+ | B Control ALL /* | ( E2 | H4 /* 10° o `` 10 % 10° 104 10° o `` 102 10° 10° Fig 6 .
Primary lymphoid cells were obtained from a normal donor ( A ) , a patient with ALL ( B ) , and a patient with Sezary syndrome ( C ) .
Cells were divided into three aliquots , mock infected ( control ) , and cocultured with the E2 promoter-driven B-galactosidase virus ( E2 ) or the histone promoter-driven B-galactosidase virus ( H4 ) .
Three days after infection cells were harvested and assayed for -galactosidase activity as described in Materials and Methods .
indolyl-8-p-galactopyranoside ( X-gal ) followed by microscopic detection of blue cells .
Using this less efficient B-galactosidase detection system , 3T 3 cells expressing the Ela 289 amino acid polypeptide infected with the E2 virus and C8166 cells infected with the E2 virus contained detectable tosidase activity whereas B-galactosidase activity was not detected in lymphocytes from three patients with CLL and two patients with ALL infected with the E2 virus .
STRAIR ET AL DISCUSSION We have described a system for the analysis of promoter function in primary cells .
The use of recombinant retroviruses allows efficient transfer of the promoter of interest into the primary cells .
The use of B-galactosidase as a marker gene allows the quantitative detection of gene expression on a cellular basis .
Hence , promoter function can be assayed in primary cells without the need for either transfection of DNA or prolonged propagation of the primary cells in culture .
The avoidance of transfection is important since it is often an inefficient means of DNA transfer into primary cells .
The ability to assay the marker gene on a single cell basis is also important since it allows the rapid detection of gene expression using a fluorescence assay without the need for selection .
Another advantage to this assay is the ability to perform dual fluorescence should it be necessary to assay promoter function in subpopulations of the primary cells .
Recombinant retroviruses containing a @ -galactosidase gene with the E2 promoter were used to study the activity of the E2 promoter in a variety of cultured and primary cells .
The results indicate that in 3T3 cells , T-cell lines such as Jurkatt and PBALL , primary normal lymphoid cells , and primary malignant lymphoid cells from patients with CLL and ALL , the E2 promoter-driven B-galactosidase gene is not expressed .
In contrast , 3T 3 cells containing the Ela-encoded 289 amino acid polypeptide , C8166 cells , and malignant lymphoid cells from a patient with Sezary syndrome , a malignant T-cell lymphoma , do express an E2 promoter-driven B-galactosidase gene .
Interestingly , C8166 cells are known to express the human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I ( HTLV-I ) transactivator polypeptide . ``
In patients with lymphoproliferative disorders cells were assayed for their ability to express the E2 promoter within 72 hours of obtaining fresh blood samples .
Control experiments with a recombinant retrovirus containing a histone promoter-driven B-galactosidase gene indicated that the cells could be infected with recombinant retroviruses and express B-galactosidase so that failure to detect -galactosidase expression after infection with the virus containing the E2 promoter is likely due to the lack of activity of this promoter in the cell type studied .
The E2 promoter has been well characterized by many investigators .
Protein binding sites , including a site for a cyclic adenosine monophosphate ( cAMP ) -responsive binding protein , have been identified . ``
In addition , the relationship between these binding proteins and inducibility by the Ela 289 amino acid polypeptide has been studied .
However , the exact mechanisms involved in activation of this promoter remain unclear .
Several unrelated viruses also produce transactivator proteins capable of increasing expression from E2 promoter-driven genes .
The ability of the HTLV-II encoded transactivator polypeptide to activate the E2 promoter has been described before `` `` and is supported by results presented in this report ; E2 promoter-driven B-galactosidase activity can be readily detected in C8166 cells , which contain the related HTLV-I encoded transactivator .
Other viruses reported to produce genes capable of increasing expression From www .
bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
GENE TRANSFER INTO LYMPHOID CELLS from the E2 promoter include such diverse viruses as : SV40 , human papilloma viruses , pseudorabies virus , and HTLV-II .
In the absence of viral transactivators the E2 promoter is generally inactive .
One notable exception is the high level of expression of E2 promoter-driven genes in embryonal carcinoma cells or early embryos .
In these cell types the ability to express genes driven by the E2 promoter is tightly regulated : neither differentiated embryonal carcinoma cells nor mature embryos will express E2 promoter-driven genes . ``
These results indicate that expression of genes containing an E2 promoter indicates either the presence of a viral transactivator or the presence of a regulated developmental stage of the cell .
DNA extracted from the lymphoid cells of the patient with Sezary syndrome did not contain nucleotide sequences complementary to adenovirus 5 , human papilloma virus 16 or 18 , or HTLV-I or -II ( data not shown ) .
Interpreted in this light the -galactosidase activity seen in the patient 's Sezary cells after infection of the cells with the E2 virus may be indicative of the presence of an as yet uncharacterized viral transactivator .
Alternatively , the Sezary cells from this patient may be in a unique stage of lymphoid differentiation that allows the expression of the E2 virus .
In either case the activity of the E2 promoter in these , as opposed to other , primary lymphoid cells may provide interesting insights into the biology of these cells .
Conceivably the dependence of the 1207 E2 promoter on transactivation may allow the widespread use of the E2 virus to detect and isolate a broad range of viruses present in pathologic tissues .
Such an assay would require neither nucleic acid sequence information nor immu-nologic reagents .
Attempts to isolate the genes responsible for transactivation of the E2 promoter in these cells as well a comprehensive analysis of E2 promoter activity in a broad spectrum of primary malignant cells are currently underway .
As a prerequisite to these studies it was necessary to demonstrate the efficient transfer of exogenous genes into primary lymphoid cells .
The results presented in this report indicate that it is possible to achieve infection and expression of 50 % to 100 % of primary normal or malignant lymphocytes with the use of an assay system that allows the rapid detection of the transferred gene .
With respect to the stability of expression , B-galactosidase activity can be detected in the majority of the cells that proliferate in culture for 17 days .
Although it is difficult to ascertain the stability of B-galactosidase for the majority of the cells infected and expressing 3-galactosidase at day 3 , it does appear that those cells that respond to mitogen-conditioned medium are capable of stable -galactosidase expression for at least 2 weeks .
The further characterization of this system with respect to the feasibility of using infected lymphocytes to express genes in vivo is currently underway .
REFERENCES 1 .
Keller G , Paige C , Gilboa E , Wagner F : Expression of a foreign gene in myeloid and lymphoid cells derived from multipotent hematopoietic precursors .
Nature 318:149 , 1985 2 .
Dzierzak EA , Pappayannopoulou T , Mulligan RC : Lineage specific expression of the human beta-globin gene in mouse bone marrow transplantation recipients reconstituted with retroviral trans-duced stem cells .
Nature 331:35 , 1988 3 .
Hock RA , Millet AD : Retroviral mediated transfer and expression of drug resistance genes in human hematopoietic progenitor cells .
Nature 320:275 , 1985 4 .
Lim B , Williams DA , Orkin SH : Retroviral mediated gene transfer of human ADA : Expression of functional enzyme in murine hematopoietic cells in vivo .
Mol Cell Biol 7:3459 , 1987 5 .
Stead RB , Kwok WW , Storb R , Miller AD : Canine model for gene therapy : Inefficient expression in dogs reconstituted with autologous marrow infected with recombinant retroviruses .
Blood 71:741 , 1988 6 .
Morgan JR , Barrandon Y , Green H , Mulligan RC : Expression of exogenous growth hormone by transplantation of human epidermal cells .
Science 237:1476 , 1987 7 .
Palmer TD , Hock RA , Osborne WR , Miller AD : Efficient retroviral mediated gene transfer and expression of the human ADA gene in diploid skin fibroblasts from an ADA deficient patient .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 84:1055 , 1987 8 .
Wilson JM , Birinyi LK , Salomon RN , Libby P , Callow AD , Mulligan RC : Implantation of vascular grafts lined with genetically modified endothelial cells .
Science 244:1344 , 1989 9 .
Nabel EG , Ploutz G , Boyce FM , Stanley JC , Nabel GJ : Recombinant gene expression in vivo within endothelial cells of the arterial wall .
Science 244:1342 , 1989 10 .
Wilson JM , Johnston DE , Jefferson DM , Mulligan RC : Correction of the genetic defect of hepatocytes from the Watanabe heritable hyperlipidemic rabbit .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 85:4421 , 1988 11 .
Uchida N , Cone RD , Freeman GJ , Mulligan RC , Cantor H : High efficiency gene transfer into murine T cell clones using a retroviral vector .
J Immunol 136:1876 , 1986 12 .
Yamoda G , Kitamura Y , Sonoda H , Harada H , Taki S , Mulligan RC , Osawa H , Diamanstein T , Yokoyama S , Tanguichi T : Retroviral expression of human IL-2 in murine T-cell lines results in cell growth autonomy and tumorigenicity .
EMBO J 6:2705 , 1987 13 .
Strair RK , Miller JS , Roberts BE : Use of recombinant retroviruses to study the regulation of stably integrated adenovirus early promoters .
J Virol 62:2143 , 1988 14 .
Feldman LT , Imperiale MF , Nevins JR : Activation of early adenovirus transcription by herpes virus immediate early genes .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 79:4952 , 1982 15 .
Chen IS , Cann AJ , Shah NP , Gaynor RB : Functional relation between HTLV II x and adenovirus Ela proteins in transcriptional activation .
Science 230:570 , 1985 16 .
Phelps WC , Yee CL , Munger K , Howley PM : ; Human papilloma virus type 16 E7 gene encodes transactivating and transforming functions similar to those of Ela .
Cell 53:539 , 1988 17 .
Loeken MR , Khoury G , Brady J : Stimulation of adenovirus E2 promoters by SV40 T antigen or ElA occurs by different mechanisms .
Mol Cell Biol 6:2020 , 1986 18 .
La Thangue NB , Rigby PWJ : An adenovirus ElA-like transcription factor is regulated during the differentiation of murine embryonal carcinoma cells .
Cell 49:507 , 1987 19 .
Suemori H , Hashimoto S , Nakatsuji N : Presence of adenovirus E1 Alike activity in preimplantation stage mouse embryos .
Mol Cell Biol 8:3553 , 1988 20 .
Strair RK , Towle MT , Smith BR : Recombinant retroviruses utilizing cell surface antigens as selectable markers .
J Virol 62:4756 , 1988 21 .
Guild BC , Finer MH , Housman DE , Mulligan RC : Development of retroviral vectors useful for gene expression in cultured From www .
bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
1208 murine embryonal cells and hematopoietic cells in vivo .
J Virol 62:3795 , 1988 22 .
Danos O , Mulligan RC : Safe and efficient generation of recombinant retroviruses with amphotropic and ecotropic host ranges .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 85:6460 , 1988 23 .
Price J , Turner D , Cepko C : Lineage analysis in the vertebrate nervous system by retrovirus mediated gene transfer .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 84:156 , 1987 24 .
Nolan GP , Fiering S , Nicolas J-F , Herzenberg LA : Fluorescence activated cell analysis and sorting of viable mammalian cells based upon 8-D-galactosidase activity after transduction of E. coli lac Z. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 85:2603 , 1988 25 .
Yu S-F , von Ruden P , Kantoff PW , Garber C , Seiberg M , STRAIR ET AL Ruther U , Anderson WF , Wagner EF , Gilboa E : Self inactivating retrovirus designed for the transfer of whole genes into mammalian cells .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 83:3194 , 1986 26 .
Korman AJ , Frantz JD , Strominger JL , Mulligan RC : Expression of class II MHC antigens using retroviral vectors .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 84:2150 , 1987 27 .
Salahuddin SZ , Markham PD , Wong-Staal F , Franchini G , Kalayanaraman VS , Gallo RC : Restricted expression of the human T cell leukemia virus in transformed human umbilical cord blood lymphocytes .
Virology 129:51 , 1983 28 .
Jones NC , Rigby PWJ , Ziff EB : Trans-acting protein factors and the regulation of eukaryotic transcription : Lessons from studies on DNA tumor viruses .
Genes Dev 2:267 , 1988 From www .
bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
« 9 a A ® 3 00 1990 76 : 1201-1208 Retroviral mediated transfer and expression of exogenous genes in primary lymphoid cells : assaying for a viral transactivator activity in normal and malignant cells o ~ -- 0 % > { MRI/UV s. f ) .
to 210 % ® RK Strair , M Towle , PW Heald and BR Smith Updated information and services can be found at : http : //www.bloodjournal.org/content/76/6/1201 .full.html Articles on similar topics can be found in the following Blood collections Information about reproducing this article in parts or in its entirety may be found online at : requests Information about ordering reprints may be found online at : http : //www.bloodjournal.org/site/misc/rights.xhtml # reprints Information about subscriptions and ASH membership may be found online at : http : //www.bloodjournal.org/site/subscriptions/index.xhtml Blood ( print ISSN 0006-4971 , online ISSN 1528-0020 ) , is published weekly by the American Society of Hematology , 2021 L St , NW , Suite 900 , Washington DC 20036 .
Copyright 2011 by The American Society of Hematology ; all rights reserved .
