Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA Vol .
87 , pp .
7861-7865 , October 1990 Immunology Stimulation of a human T-cell clone with anti-CD3 or tumor necrosis factor induces NF-B translocation but not human immunodeficiency virus 1 enhancer-dependent transcription ( long terminal repeat /transcription factors /lymphokines/T-cell clone /antigen recognition ) Uriel HazAn* , Dominique THomas* , JosE ALcaMI* , Francoise BACHELERIE* , NICOLE IsRAEL* , Hans YssEL !
, JEaAnN-Louis VIRELIZIER** , AND FERNANDO ARENZANA-SEISDEDOS* *Unite d'Immunologie Virale , Institut Pasteur , 28 rue du Dr. Roux , 75724 Paris Cedex 15 , France : ; and *DNA ' X Research Institute , 901 California Avenue , Palo Alto , CA 94304-1104 Communicated by Andre Lwoff , June 27 , 1990 ABSTRACT The expression of transiently transfected expression vectors under the control of the long terminal repeat ( LTR ) of the human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) or its enhancer sequence and the translocation of the HIV enhancer-binding protein NF- « B were analyzed in two human T-cell clones stimulated through their T-cell receptor complex or by tumor necrosis factor or phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate .
We found a dissociation of NF-xB translocation from transactivation of either the HIV LTR or the HIV enhancer .
Interleukin 2 induced proliferation but not NF-B translocation or LTR transactivation .
Phorbol ester or specific antigen recognition induced HIV LTR transactivation , whereas stimulation with tumor necrosis factor or antibody to CD3 did not .
The two latter signals were nevertheless able to induce NF- « B translocation with a pattern in the band-shift assay indistinguishable from that observed using phorbol ester .
Our finding that induction of NF-xB by tumor necrosis factor or antibody to CD3 is not sufficient to induce HIV enhancer-dependent transcription in cloned T cells contrasts with results obtained in most lymphoblastoid T-cell lines and indicates that normal T lymphocytes differ from tumoral T cells in terms of requirements for HIV LTR activation .
Furthermore , our results suggest that events linked to T-cell activation , in addition to NF-xB translocation per se , induce functional interactions of the complex with the HIV enhancer .
Among circulating leukocytes ( peripheral blood lympho-cytes ) of human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) -seropositive patients , CD4-positive T lymphocytes represent the main cell type infected ( 1 ) .
Such cells , when cultured in vitro , show very little , if any , HIV replication .
Virus production is induced in peripheral blood lymphocyte cultures from most patients by stimulation with mitogens , such as phytohemagglutinin or phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate ( PMA ) ( 2 ) .
This indicates that transcriptional activation of HIV provirus from a quiescent state in resting , circulating lymphocytes is under the control of cellular genes induced during T-cell activation , as has been discussed ( 3 ) .
Analysis of molecular events linking T-cell activation to HIV provirus activation is essential for our understanding of the pathogenesis of AIDS .
Most of our knowledge in this field comes from the study of HIV long terminal repeat ( LTR ) activity in tumoral lymphoblastoid T-cell lines .
In such cell systems , it has been shown that the HIV LTR is the main region regulating transcription .
It contains a 10-base-pair direct repeat enhancer element that can bind and respond to NF- « B-like transcription factor ( s ) ( 4 ) translocated from the cytoplasm upon stimulation with PMA or mitogens ( 5 ) .
Two natural cytokines , tumor necrosis factor The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge payment .
This article must therefore be hereby marked `` advertisement `` in accordance with 18 U.S.C .
§1734 solely to indicate this fact .
7861 ( TNF ) and lymphotoxin ( LT ) , have also been shown to induce both HIV replication and HIV LTR transactivation through translocation into the nucleus of NF- « B-like protein ( s ) that can bind to the HIV enhancer ( 6-8 ) .
In addition , mutation of the 10-base-pair repeat sequence that binds NF- « B abolishes mitogen-induced HIV LTR transactivation in lymphoblastoid T-cell lines ( 5 ) .
It is important to understand which physiological signals induce HIV transcription in normal T lymphocytes .
Indeed , mitogens are artificial reagents and TNF may not be able to activate resting T lymphocytes that do not express detectable TNF receptors ( 9 ) .
A physiological event that can activate CD4-positive T lymphocytes from their normal resting state is antigen recognition ( 10 ) .
Our approach has been to use as an experimental system , CD4-positive T-lymphocyte cell clones maintained in interleukin 2 ( IL-2 ) -rich medium and transfected with HIV LTR expression vectors .
The advantages of this cell system are manifold : ( ? )
cloned T cells are not tumoral , ( i ) they express functional membrane receptors , ( ii ? )
they respond to and produce lymphokines such as IL-2 , TNF , LT , and inter-feron-y ( IFN-y ) , and ( iv ) they can be directly activated by specific antigen presentation .
In this system , we found that the requirements for HIV LTR transactivation are different from those reported in tumoral T-cell lines .
MATERIAL AND METHODS Cells .
Clone D106 ( a kind gift from M. Agrapart and J. J .
Ballet , Hopital St. Louis , Paris ) is a human CD4-positive , CD3-positive , CD8-negative T-cell clone that specifically responds to tetanus toxoid when cocultured with autologous macrophages ( 11 ) .
Clone SPB21 is a CD4-positive , CD3-positive , CD8-negative human T-cell clone that was selected through specific proliferation triggered by anti-T-cell receptor ( TCR ) -CD3 monoclonal antibody ( mAb ) 3D6 ( 12 ) .
After thawing , SPB21 cells and irradiated allogenic peripheral blood leukocytes were stimulated with phytohemagglutinin ( 0.1 ug/mi , Wellcome ) and cocuitured for 3 days as described ( 12 ) .
On day 3 , and every 3 days thereafter , recombinant ( r ) IL-2 ( Cetus ) at 20 ng/ml was added to the cultures .
The human lymphoblastoid cell line J-Jhan , a subclone of the Jurkat cell line , was cultured and transfected as described ( 8 ) .
707/3 is a pre-B-cell line ( 13 ) .
Abbreviations : CAT , chloramphenicol acetyltransferase ; HIV , human immunodeficiency virus ; HEBP , HIV enhancer binding protein ; IFN-y , interferon-y ; IL-2 , interleukin 2 ; LT , lymphotoxin ; LTR , long terminal repeat ; Luc , luciferase ; PMA , phorbol 12-myristate l3-acetate ; TK , thymidine kinase ; TNF , tumor necrosis factor ; r , recombinant ; TCR , T-cell receptor ; CRE , cAMP-responsive ele-ment ; mAb , monoclonal antibody .
whom reprint requests should be addressed .
7862 Immunology : Hazan et al .
Lymphokine Assays .
Supernatants from cell cultures were titrated for IFN-y and TNF/LT production with standard bioassays as described ( 14 ) .
Culture Medium , Lymphokines , and Antibodies .
Yssel 's medium , an Iscove 's modified Dulbecco 's medium ( GIBCO/ BRL ) ( 15 ) , was supplemented with 1 % heat-inactivated pooled human AB serum .
PMA was purchased from Sigma .
rIL-2 was from Cetus .
Human rTNF and neutralizing rabbit antisera to TNF and LT were a gift from W. Fiers ( Rijksuni-versitat , Ghent , Belgium ) .
Purified anti-TNF mAb TE115 was a gift from D. Lando ( Roussel-UCLAF ) .
mAb SPV T3b , an IgG2a directed against CD3 molecule ( 16 ) , was used as crude ascites fluid .
Plasmids .
We constructed a series of Luciferase ( Luc ) expression vectors ( 17 ) under the control of various HIV LTR fragments or of the weak truncated herpes simplex thymidine kinase ( TK ) promoter ( positions -105 to +51 ) .
The HIV LTR fragment [ Xho I ( -640 ) -HindIII ( +78 ) ] containing the U3 and R regions was cloned into the pC-Luc plasmid , generating pLTRX-Luc .
A shorter LTR fragment [ Sca I ( -142 ) -HindIll ( +78 ) ] was cloned in pC-Luc , yielding plasmid pLTRS-Luc .
The p3enhTK-Luc vector was constructed by cloning the 270-base-pair Bgl II ( Klenow ) -Sal I fragment of plasmid pHI-03TK-CAT , as described ( 8 ) , into the HindIlI ( Klenow ) -Sal I sites of the pC-Luc polylinker ( 17 ) .
This vector contains three copies of the HIV-enhancer synthetic oligonucleotide described below in the band-shift assay .
Various tat expression vectors were used .
Vector pLTRA-tat contained the Ava HIV LTR fragment upstream of tat cDNA with the simian virus 40 poly ( A ) region .
The pCMV-tat vector contained a tat cDNA with the simian virus 40 poly ( A ) region inserted downstream of the human cytomegalovirus immediate early enhancer/ promoter ( 17 ) .
Finally the pLTRX-CAT used in experiments shown in Fig .
1 carries the bacterial chloramphenicol ace-tyltransferase ( CAT ) gene under the control of the Xho I-HindlII LTR fragment described above .
Cell Transfection .
D106 cells ( 2 x 10 `` cells ) were transfected with 5-10 ug of plasmid ( s ) by using a modified DEAE-dextran technique ( 8 ) .
Transfected cells were dispatched and layered on autologous irradiated monocytes used as antigen-presenting cells .
Tetanus toxoid ( purified tetanus toxoid , Bi-oMerieux , Charbonnier les Bains , France ) was used at 10 ug/ml .
Ten days after thawing SPB21 cells ( 5 x 10 `` to 1 x 10° cells ) were transfected with 20-30 ug of plasmid ( s ) by electroporation in RPMI 1640 medium ( GIBCO/BRL ) with 5 % ( vol/vol ) human AB serum in the absence of rIL-2 .
A single pulse at 680 V/cm and 1340 uF was done .
After the electric shock , cells transfected with the same plasmid ( s ) were pooled , washed , and incubated for 8 hr , before stimulation by anti-CD3 ( ascites fluid dilution , 1:500 ) , rTNF ( 500 units/ml ) , PMA ( 10 ng/ml ) , or rIL-2 ( 20 ng/ml ) .
Luc and CAT Assays .
These were performed as described ( 8 , 17 ) 18-20 hr after cell stimulation .
Luc index represents the Luc activity relative to the cell number and was calculated using the following formula : ( Luc cpm - background cpm ) / ( number of living cells x 10 ~* ) .
Band-Shift Assay .
For preparation of nuclear proteins , SPB21 cells were washed and deprived of rIL-2 for 16-18 hr before being stimulated as described above .
70Z/3 pre-B cells were stimulated by PMA ( 25 ng/ml ) , thus providing bona fide NF- « B-positive control ( 13 ) .
Nuclear extracts from control and stimulated cells were then prepared and tested as described ( 8 , 18 ) .
Double-stranded oligonucleotides corresponding to either wild-type or mutated enhancer repeat ( NF- « B-like binding site ) of HIV LTR enhancer ( a gift from C. Auffray and A. Delaroche , Institut d'Embriologie , Nogent sur Marne , France ) or to the immunoglobulin « chain NF- « B binding site ( gift from A. Israél , Institut Pasteur , Paris ) were labeled at the 5 ' end .
Specific binding was controlled by competition with a Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 87 ( 1990 ) 50-fold excess of either unlabeled HIV enhancer or unlabeled irrelevant oligonucleotide [ corresponding to the cAMP-responsive element ( CRE ) of the somatostatin gene ( 19 ) , a gift from M. Yaniv ( Institut Pasteur , Paris ) ] .
Sequences of the oligonucieotides used are as follows : HIV enhancer , S'-AGCTTACAAGGGACTTTCCGCTGGG-GACTTTCCAGGGA-3 ' ; HIV enhancer mutant ( mutated sites are underlined ) , S !
-ACTCACTTTCCGCTGECTITCACTT-TCC-3 ' ; immunoglobulin « -chain enhancer , 5-GACA-GAGGGGACTTTCCGAGAGG-3 ' ; somatostatin CRE , 5'-GTTGGCTGACGTCATCAAGCTA-3 ' .
RESULTS Cells of the D106 clone were transiently transfected with an HIV-LTR-CAT construct and specifically stimulated with tetanus toxoid .
An increase in CAT activity was observed in antigen-stimulated cultures , and a further increase was found in stimulated cells cotransfected with the HIV-LTR-tat vec-tor , as can be seen in the representative experiment shown in Fig .
1 .
It can be seen in Fig .
2 that the basal level of LTR activity ( pLTRS-Luc vector ) was remarkably low in T-cell clone SPB21 and was poorly enhanced by cotransfection of a vector permitting tat protein expression under the control of the autologous LTR .
In contrast , cotransfection of fat driven by the strong cytomegalovirus immediate early promoter ( 20 ) led to transactivation of the HIV-LTR-Luc vector .
We tested the effects of PMA and rTNF on the activity of LTR-Luc constructs electroporated with or without an LTR-tat expression vector .
Fig .
2 shows that PMA stimulated activity of the HIV LTR , an effect further increased by cotransfection of an LTR-tat vector .
In contrast , was unable to induce HIV LTR transactivation , even when cotransfected with pLTR-tat , which would be expected to synergize in the system .
In parallel experiments , the same o t # 9 ?
Fig .
1 .
- Antigen presentation induces HIV LTR transactivation in the D106 T-cell clone .
The pLTRX-CAT vector was transfected alone or cotransfected with a pLTR-tat expression vector into the D106 T-cell clone by using DEAE-dextran ( Sigma ) .
After transfec-tion , T cells were cocultured with adherent autologous monocytes in the presence ( + ) or absence ( - ) of tetanus toxoid ( 10 ug/ml ) .
CAT activity was measured in cell lysates 24 hr after stimulation .
Figures at the top of columns represent fold amplification relative to CAT conversion in the absence of antigen stimulation .
Immunology : Hazan et al .
Luc index ( x 10d ) None PMA rTNF Inducer None PMA rTNF - None None rTNF Cotransfection None pLTRA-tat pCMV-tat None Cells SPB21 J-JHAN Fig .
2 .
HIV LTR activity in the SPB21 T-cell clone after elec- troporation of the pLTRS-Luc vector .
Cells were stimulated by PMA or rTNF without ( ® ) or with ( @ ) cotransfection of pLTRA-tat .
The effect of cotransfection of pCMV-tat is also shown ( @ ) .
The same preparation of rTNF ( 500 units/ml ) was used to enhance expression of the pLTRS-Luc vector transfected alone in the J-Jhan T-lympho-blastoid cell line ( 0 ) .
Figures at the top of columns represent fold amplification relative to Luc expression in unstimulated cells transfected with pLTRS-Luc alone .
preparation of rT NF was able to induce LTR transactivation in the human lymphoblastoid T-cell line J-Jhan , as reported ( 8 ) .
No transactivation of the HIV LTR was observed in SPB21 clone stimulated by anti-CD3 antibody or rIL-2 .
Stimulation with antibody to CD3 induced T-cell activation , as measured by cell proliferation and secretion of TNF , LT , and IFN-y , but did not stimulate the activity of the LTR ( see Figs .
3 and 4 ) .
Addition of or rIL-2 was similarly ineffective ( mean of amplification , 0.9 ranging from 0.7- to 2-fold ; data not shown ) .
In contrast , PMA induced both lymphokine secretion and activation of the HIV LTR .
The effect of the above described signals on HIV enhancer binding protein ( HEBP ) induction in the SPB21 clone , compared to their ability to stimulate cell proliferation and lymphokine production , is shown in Fig .
3 .
Addition of rIL-2 Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 87 ( 1990 ) 7863 induced intense cell proliferation , but very little ( not detectable in most experiments ) induction of HEBP , TNF , LT , or IFN-y .
In contrast , stimulation with PMA , rTNF , or anti-CD3 mAb always resulted in a clear induction of a specific HEBP of comparable intensity whatever the inducer used .
It should be noted that CD3 stimulation induced modest , but clearly detectable proliferation ( proliferation index range from 3 to 5 ) and also secretion of TNF/LT and IFN-y .
However , complete neutralization of TNF and LT by specific antibodies during stimulation by anti-CD3 did not significantly decrease HEBP induction .
Fig .
4 shows a representative experiment in which HEBP induction and transactivation of either HIV-LTR or enhancer TK-Luc vectors were performed in parallel , using the same culture conditions .
Cells used for band-shift assay were thus electroporated without plasmid .
We had observed that T-cell clones tended to release TNF and LT transiently in the hours after electroporation .
To avoid NF-KB induction by TNF/LT before stimulation , we performed the experiment shown in Fig .
4 in the continuous presence of excess neutralizing anti-TNF and anti-LT antibodies before washing and stimulation .
Under these conditions , no TNF/LT activity was detectable at any time before stimulation .
Supernatants of unstimulated cultures remained TNF/LT -negative after removal of the neutralizing antibodies .
Stimulation of the culture at that stage induced TNF and LT secretion .
It can be seen ( Fig .
44 ) that comparable levels of a specific binding on the HIV-enhancer oligonucleotide and lymphokine secretion were obtained with the three inducers ( anti-CD3 , rTNF , and PMA ) .
It was again observed that PMA , but not anti-CD3 antibody or rTNF , induced transactivation of the two vectors used ( Fig .
4B ) .
Fig .
5 shows that the migration patterns induced by the anti-CD3 antibody , rTNF , and PMA were indistinguishable from one another and from that of bona fide NF- « B protein induced in 70Z2/3 pre-B cells by PMA ( 13 ) .
DESCUSSION The present report demonstrates that antigen recognition by a human T-cell clone results in transactivation of the HIV-LTR vectors transfected in such nontumoral cells .
This was observed in cultures of a CD4-positive tetanus-toxoid-specific T-cell clone Enhancer W M W M W M W M W M W M probe m a - m a =- m a -- e « i i g a g Competition o § & oo § & oo 5 & o o 5 # o o 5 § oo 5 & o s » 6 % « # = w= ® # semuft-® hay # # t but bg = w « Inducer None rIL2 PMA rTNF e-CD3 w-CD3 e-TNF/LT Proliferation index 1 66 2 2 3.5 11 TNF/LT ( U/m1 ) - « 2 < 2 128 ND 48 < 2 IFN-y ( U/m1 ) < 3 < 3 18 9 36 24 Fig .
3 .
Identification of specific nuclear factors binding to the HIV enhancer in SPB21 cells incubated for 16 hr with PMA , rTNF , rIL-2 , or anti-CD3 ( a-CD3 ) .
Polyclonal antibodies to TNF ( a-TNF ) and LT ( a-LT ) were added to the cell culture before stimulation with a-CD3 .
Band-shift assay was performed using either wild-type ( W ) or mutated ( M ) labeled HIV enhancer probe .
The specific band is shown by an arrow .
Culture supernatants were collected 16 hr after stimulation for analysis of TNF/LT ( ND , TNF/LT activity was not determined when rTNF was used as inducer ) and IFN-y .
Proliferation index is the ratio of [ } H ] thymidine incorporation by induced cells relative to unstimulated cells .
U/ml , unit ( s ) /ml ; Enh .
, enhancer .
7864 Immunology : Hazan et al .
¥ W U tuh ss wat tah tas wt ss Ct INDUCER None PMA - rTNF « -CD3 B no “ 20 Q L 15 i `` ) R E 10 § 3 t x 1 \ x 1.1 .
\mss SS Sy - » INDUCER None - PMA - rTNF a-CD3 TNF/LT ( U/mi ) | < 2 128 ND 64 fe 16 x 3.5 ' o 3 a 10 T C & bel _J 0 INDUCER _ None PMA - rTNF a-CD3 TNF/LT ( U/mi ) < 2 48 ND 128 Fig .
4 .
- Comparison of band-shift assay and LTR transactivation results obtained in parallel experiments after electroporation of SPB21 cells .
The same preparation of inducers was used to stimulate the three experimental groups .
( A ) Band-shift assay .
Cells were electroporated in the absence of plasmid ( mock transfection ) , pooled , washed , and subcultured in medium containing both monoclonal anti-TNF antibody and polyclonal anti-LT antibody for 8 hr .
Cells were then washed extensively to eliminate neutralizing antibodies to TNF and LT and stimulated for an additional period of 8 hr .
Labeled HIV enhancer oligonucleotide probes , wild-type ( W ) or mutated ( M ) , were used to localize the specific band ( arrow ) .
( B ) HIV LTR activity .
Cells were electroporated with pLTRS-Luc + pLTRA-tat ( @ ) or p3enhTK-Luc ( ® ) .
Culture conditions and stimulation as described in A except that cell lysates for Luc assay were prepared 16 hr after cell stimulation .
Figures at the top of columns represent fold amplification relative to unstimulated cells .
U/ml , unit ( s ) /ml ; « -CD3 , anti-CD3 .
stimulated with antigen in the presence of autologous adherent monocytes .
This observation , obtained with a pure cell population directly triggered by tetanus toxoid antigen through the TCR-CD3 complex , confirms and extends previously reported data ( 21 , 22 ) .
Indeed HIV replication has been found to be enhanced in tetanus-toxoid-stimulated peripheral blood lymphocytes infected with HIV ( 21 ) , and HIV-LTR vectors have been shown to be induced in primary T-cell blasts obtained after stimulation with purified protein derivative ( 22 ) .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 87 ( 1990 ) ¥ V ¥ Fig .
5 .
Band-shift assay using oligonucleotide probes with the sequences of either the immunoglobulin « ( Ig- « ) chain ( A ) or the HIV enhancer ( B ) in nuclear extracts from the 70Z/3 cell line stimulated with PMA or SPB21 T cells stimulated with PMA , rTNF , or anti-CD3 ( a-CD3 ) .
Three types of HIV-LTR-Luc vectors were transfected into a CD4-positive IL-2-dependent T-cell clone ( SPB21 ) that can be activated by soluble anti-CD3 antibody ( 23 ) to secrete TNF , LT , and IFN-y .
In this cell system , such stimulation did not result in detectable activation of the LTR using various transfected vectors , despite evidence of cell activation .
rIL-2 induced intense cell proliferation but no LTR transactivation .
Addition of rTNF did not modify the activity of the vectors used .
These negative results were not due to an intrinsic inability of the T-cell clone environment to permit transactivation of the HIV LTR , since it clearly responded to PMA stimulation .
Indeed , PMA induced activation of the three vectors used , indicating that the region upstream of position -142 is not necessary for PMA induction and that HIV enhancer sequences played a major role in the response to PMA in our cell system .
Our results , obtained in a normal T-cell clone , differ from those reported in tumor cell lines .
In Jurkat cells , it was shown that stimulation with immobilized OKT3 antibody to CD3 is sufficient to induce HIV LTR transactivation ( 24 ) .
Similarly , our laboratory ( 8 ) and other groups ( 6 , 7 ) have found that stimulation with rFNF alone is able to stimulate HIV transcription in tumor T-cell lines .
CD3 stimulation and rTNF induced HEBP in SPB21 cells in a manner similar to PMA .
HEBP induction by anti-CD3 antibody was not a consequence of endogenous TNF/LT secretion , since complete neutralization of TNF and LT by specific antisera did not significantly diminish CD3-triggered HEBP induction .
As neutralization of TNF in cell cultures is highly efficient , this indicates that CD3 stimulation induces HEBP through a pathway at least partially independent of autocrine secretion of TNF and LT .
It should be noted that rIL-2 induced intense proliferation but showed a very modest and variable effect on HEBP induction in our T-cell clone .
Thus T-cell proliferation per se can be dissociated from HEBP induction and HIV LTR transactivation .
Immunology : Hazan et al .
It remains to be understood why CD3 simulation and rTNF induced HEBP but not LTR transactivation , whereas PMA did both .
To explain this surprising difference , two hypotheses can be envisaged .
One is that PMA , known to induce a wide repertoire of transcription factors ( 25 ) , could activate , apart from protein ( s ) efficient in HIV enhancer binding and induction , factors that would interact functionally with other sequences in the LTR .
This is unlikely , however , because similar results were obtained when a TK-Luc vector driven by the synthetic oligonucleotide sequence of the HIV enhancer was used instead of the HIV-LTR-Luc constructions .
The second possibility would be that the protein ( s ) induced by PMA or the two other inducers used bind to the HIV enhancer but differ qualitatively .
Indeed , the HIV enhancer is able to bind purified NF- « B protein ( 26 ) but also protein factors with a different molecular weight ( 27 , 28 ) .
In our band-shift assays , however , the protein factor ( s ) induced by anti-CD3 antibody or rNF behaved indistinguishably from HEBP induced by PMA or bona fide NF- « B obtained from PMA-induced 70Z/3 cells ( 13 , 26 ) .
Such properties are compatible with the interpretation that the NF- « B protein complex ( 29 ) was the enhancer-binding factor detected in our cell system , whatever the inducer used .
If this interpretation is correct , we are bound to conclude that induction of NF- « B binding activity in the nucleus is not a sufficient condition for the HIV enhancer to be transactivated in nontumoral T lymphocytes , such as T-cell clones .
In normal T cells , events linked to cell activation appear to be necessary , in addition to NF- « B translocation , to induce functional interactions of the NF- « B protein complex with the HIV enhancer .
This could occur through either induction of another factor undetectable in band-shift assays , which would act in combination with NF- « B or , more probably , through post-translational modifications of one or more protein components of the NF- « B complex ( 29 ) .
Such dissociation between DNA-protein interaction and functional induction is not unprecedented , as shown with the c-fos promoter ( 30 ) .
We observed that NF-KB induction , presumably resulting from TCR-CD3-induced protein kinase C activation , was not sufficient to induce LTR transactivation whereas antigen recognition , known to involve costimulatory signals , resulted in HIV LTR induction .
It appears that several activation signals , such as those provided by antigen-presenting cells , must synergize to attain both full T-cell activation and HIV LTR transactivation .
In IL-2-dependent cloned T lymphocytes , such factor ( s ) would be inducible by PMA and antigen recognition , but not by TNF and soluble antibody to CD3 .
Stimulation by appropriate ligands of single transmembrane receptors , such as the CD3 complex or the TNF receptor is sufficient for induction of NF- « B translocation but not for induction of HIV LTR-dependent transcription .
These observations limit the hypothesis that exogenous or autocrine secretion of TNF alone has a major role per se in HIV provirus activation , although it may amplify it .
Specific antigen recognition through the TCR-CD3 complex , in association with other membrane molecules and secondary secretion of cytokines , is the physiological signaling system inducing full activation of T cells from their basal resting state and is likely to be the main trigger of HIV transcription in infected human T lymphocytes .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 87 ( 1990 ) 7865 We are grateful to A. Israel and S. Michelson for critical reading of the manuscript and to M. Policard for providing blood from normal donors .
The support of Agence Nationale de Recherche sur le SIDA is gratefully acknowledged .
U. H. was supported by a fellowship from Comite National d'Action contre le SIDA , F.B .
was supported by Agence Nationale de Recherche sur le SIDA , and J .
A. was supported by Fondo de Investigaciones Sanitarias de la Seguridad Social ( Spain ) and Caja de Ahorros y Monte de Piedad de Madrid .
DNAX Research Institute is supported by Schering-Plough .
1 .
- Schnittman , S. M. , Psallidopoulos , M. C. , Lane , H. C. , Thomp-son , L. , Baseler , M. , Massari , F. , Fox , C. H. , Saalzman , N. P. & Fauci , A. S. ( 1989 ) Science 245 , 305-308 .
2 .
McElrath , M. J. , Pruett , J. E. & Cohn , Z .
A .
( 1989 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 86 , 675-679 .
Virelizier , J.-L. ( 1990 ) Curr .
Opin .
Immunol .
2 , 409-413 .
Lenardo , M. J .
& Baltimore , D. ( 1989 ) Cell 58 , 227-229 .
Nabel , G. & Baltimore , D. ( 1987 ) Nature ( London ) 326 , 711- 713 .
6 .
Osborn , L. , Kunkel , S. & Nabel , G. J .
( 1989 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 86 , 2336-2340 .
7 .
Duh , E. J. , Maury , W. J. , Folks , T. M. , Fauci , A. S. & Rabson , A .
B .
( 1989 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 86 , 5974-5978 .
8 .
Israél , N. , Hazan , U. , Alcami , J. , Munier , A. , Arenzana-Seisdedos , F. , Bachelerie , F. , Israél , A .
& Virelizier , J. L. ( 1989 ) J. Immunol .
143 , 3956-3960 .
9 .
Scheurich , P. B. , Thoma , B. , Ucer , U .
& Pfizenmaier , K. ( 1987 ) J. Immunol .
138 , 1786-1790 .
10 .
Katz , D. R. ( 1988 ) Curr .
Opin .
Immunol .
1 , 213-219 .
11 .
- Schmitt , C. , Ballet , J. J. , Agrapart , M. & Bizzini , B .
( 1982 ) Eur .
J. Immunol .
12 , 849-854 .
12 .
Spits , H. , Yssel , H. , Terhost , C. & de Vries , J. E. ( 1982 ) J. Immunol .
128 , 95-99 .
13 .
Sen , R. & Baltimore , D. ( 1986 ) Cell 47 , 921-928 .
14 .
Arenzana-Seisdedos , F. , Mogensen , S. C. , Vuillier , F. , Fiers , W. & Virelizier , J.-L. ( 1988 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 85 , 6087-6091 .
15 .
Yssel , H. , de Vries , J. E. , Koken , M. , Van Blitterswijk , W. & Spits , H. ( 1984 ) J. Immunol .
Methods 72 , 219-227 .
16 .
Spits , H. , Keizer , G. , Borst , J. , Terhost , C. , Hekman , A .
& de Vries , J. E. ( 1983 ) Hybridoma 2 , 423-428 .
17 .
Schwartz , O. , Virelizier , J.-L. , Montagnier , L. & Hazan , U .
( 1990 ) Gene 88 , 197-205 .
18 .
Yano , O. , Kanellopoulos , J. , Kieran , M. , Le Bail , O. , Israél , A .
& Kourilsky , P. ( 1987 ) EMBO J .
6 , 3317-3324 .
19 .
Deutsch , P. J. , Hoeffler , J. P. , Jameson , J. L. , Lin , J. C. & Habener , J. F. ( 1988 ) J. Biol .
Chem .
263 , 18466-18472 .
20 .
Boshart , M. , Weber , F. , Jahn , G. , Dorsh-Hasler , K. , Fleck-enstein , B .
& Schaffner , W. ( 1985 ) Cell 41 , 521-530 .
21 .
Margolick , J .
B. , Volkman , D. J. , Folks , T. M. & Fauci , A. S. ( 1987 ) J. Immunol .
138 , 1719-1723 .
22 .
Horvat , R. T. & Wood , C. ( 1989 ) J. Immunol .
132 , 2745-2751 .
23 .
Yssel , H. , Aubry , J. P. , de Waal Malefijt , R. , de Vries , J. E. & Spits , H. ( 1987 ) J. Immunol .
139 , 2850-2855 .
24 .
Tong-Starksten , S. , Luciw , P. A .
& Peterlin , B. M. ( 1989 ) J. Immunol .
142 , 702-707 .
25 .
Mermod , N. , Williams , T. J .
& Tjian , R. ( 1988 ) Nature ( London ) 332 , 557-561 .
26 .
- Lenardo , M. J. , Kuang , A. , Gifford , A .
& Baltimore , D. ( 1988 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 85 , 8825-8829 .
27 .
Franza , B. R. , Josephs , S. F. , Gilman , M. Z. , Ryan , W. & Clarkson , B .
( 1987 ) Nature ( London ) 330 , 391-394 .
28 .
Isragl , A. , Le Bail , O. , Hatat , D. , Piette , J.. Kieran , M. , Logeat , F. , Wallach , D. , Fellous , M. & Kourilsky , F. ( 1989 ) EMBO J .
8 , 3793-3800 .
29 .
Baeuerle , P. A .
& Baltimore , D. ( 1989 ) Genes Dev .
3 , 1689-1698 .
30 .
Prywes , R. & Roeder , R. G. ( 1986 ) Cell 47 , 777-784. ii p to
