Downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on May 10 , 2019 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press A thymus-specific member of the HMG protein family regulates the human T cell receptor Ca enhancer Marian L. Waterman , Wolfgang H. Fischer , `` and Katherine A. Jones* Molecular Biology and Virology Laboratory and Regulatory Biology Laboratory , 'Peptide Biology Laboratory , The Salk Institute , La Jolla , California 92037 USA The human T cell-specific transcription factor TCF-1 @ « plays a key role in the tissue-specific activation of the T cell receptor ( TCR ) Ca enhancer and binds to pyrimidine-rich elements ( 5'-PyCTTTG-3 ' ) present in a variety of other T cell-specific control regions .
Using amino acid sequence information derived from the DNA affinity-purified protein , we have now isolated cDNA clones encoding TCF-1a « .
The TCF-1 « cDNA contains a single 68-amino-acid domain that is homologous to a region conserved among high-mobility group ( HMG ) and nonhistone chromosomal proteins .
Expression of full-length and mutant cDNA clones in bacteria reveal that the single HMG motif , which is predicted to contain two extended a-helical segments , is sufficient to direct the sequence-specific binding of TCF-1a « to DNA .
Northern blot experiments demonstrate further that TCF-1 « mRNA is highly tissue specific , found primarily in the thymus or T cell lines .
The immature CEM T cell line expresses relatively low levels of TCF-la mRNA , which are increased upon activation of these cells by phorbol esters .
Interestingly , the cloned TCF-1a protein is a potent transcriptional activator of the human TCRa enhancer in nonlymphoid cell lines , whereas the activity of the endogenous protein in T cell lines is strongly dependent on an additional T cell-specific protein that interacts with the core enhancer .
TCF-1a is currently unique among the newly emerging family of DNA-binding regulatory proteins that share the HMG motif in that it is a highly tissue-specific RNA polymerase II transcription factor .
[ Key Words : TCRa enhancer ; HMG protein ; T cell-specific transcription factor ] Received January 2 , 1991 ; revised version accepted January 25 , 1991 .
The development of pluripotent stem cells into highly specialized T cell lymphocytes can be defined by the appearance and assembly at the cell surface of multicom-ponent complexes containing the T cell receptor [ TCR ) and CD3 antigens .
Functionally distinct T cell lineages bear either the « /B or y/8 heterodimeric forms of the T cell receptor [ Davis and Bjorkman 1988 ) .
TCRa « /B * cells predominate in mature peripheral blood T cells ( includ-ing helper and cytotoxic cell subtypes ) and function to mediate major histocompatability complex { MHC ) -restricted antigen recognition in combination with either the CD4 or CD8 antigens ( for review , see Marrack and Kappler 1987 ; Strominger 1989 ) .
The TCR genes , like other members of the immunoglobulin gene super-family , are rearranged and expressed developmentally in a stage-specific manner that begins with the y/ & -chain genes and follows with the B-chain and lastly the « -chain genes ( Furley et al .
1986 ; Pardoll et al .
1987 ; Havran and Allison 1988 ) .
The coordinate synthesis of the members of the TCTR-CD3 complex is accomplished by a combination of both transcriptional and post-transcriptional steps ( Wilkinson and MacLeod 1988 ; Paillard et al .
1990 ) , *Corresponding author .
with transcriptional regulation mediated by potent T cell-specific enhancers that have been mapped downstream of many of these genes { Krimpenfort et al .
1988 ; McDougall et al .
1988 ; Ho et al .
1989 ; Winoto and Baltimore 1989a ; Redondo et al .
1990 ) .
The best-characterized of the TCR enhancers lies 4.5 kb downstream of the « -chain gene ( Chien et al .
1987 ) and is recognized by a complex array of DNA-binding proteins , although a minimal core segment spanning 100 bp is sufficient for high-level activity in mature « /B * T cell lines [ Ho et al .
1989 ; Winoto and Baltimore 19892 ) .
This core segment interacts with three DNA-binding proteins : a ubiquitously distributed member of the cAMP-responsive { CREB/ATF ) transcription factor family ( Mo et al .
1989 ) , the T cell-specific TCF-l « factor ( Waterman and Jones 1990 ] , and a distinct T cell-specific protein { TCF-2 « ) that may be a member of the c-ets protein family ( Ho et al .
1990 ] .
The core TCRa enhancer is a potent T cell-specific control region that can activate heterologous promoters in mature T cell lines , and each of the three protein-binding sites is necessary for enhancer activity in vivo { ( Winoto and Baltimore 19892 ; Ho et al .
1990 ; Waterman and Jones 1990 ) .
Interestingly , a subfragment of the enhancer lacking the CRE motif re 656 GENES & DEVELOPMENT 5:656-669 © 1991 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory ISSN 0890-9369/91 $ 3.00 Downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on May 10 , 2019 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press presses transcription from heterologous promoters in a T cell-specific manner ( Ho and Leiden 1990 ) .
The « enhancer is less active in immature T cell lines ( e.g .
, CCREF-CEM cells ) but can be stimulated in these cells by treatment with phorbol esters { ( Winoto and Baltimore 1989a ) , which also induces surface expression of the TCRa/B complex ( Shackelford et al .
1987 ) .
Rearrangement and expression of the TCRa gene is regulated in a lineage-specific manner in developing thymocytes because the « -chain gene is transcribed in TCR « /B* but not in TCRy/8 * T cells ( for review , see Alt et al .
1987 ) .
In the mouse , the minimal 116- bp TCRa enhancer core was found to be fully active in y/8 * cell lines , whereas larger fragments of the enhancer ( 5 kb or greater ) were inactive ( Winoto and Baltimore 1989b ) .
These larger fragments contain multiple `` silencer `` elements reported to extinguish enhancer activity in a variety of non-a « B * cell lines .
Consequently , the T cell-specific factors associated with the minimal enhancer appear to be expressed and active in both T cell subtypes but are subject to lineage-specific repression in y/8 * T cells .
We recently reported the purification and characterization of TCF-la « , a new T cell-specific DNA-binding protein that recognizes the 100-bp core region of the human TCRa « enhancer ( Waterman and Jones 1990 ) .
TCF-1a was purified from nuclear extracts of Jurkat cells and shown to consist of a family of 57- to 53-kD proteins that bind specifically to pyrimidine-rich elements ( e.g .
, 5'-PyCTTTG-3 `` ) , which are present in a variety of T cell-specific control regions , including the TCRa enhancer , the p56 `` * and CD3 { y and 8 ) promoters , and the HIV-1 long terminal repeat ( LTR ) .
More recently , we have found that the TCF-la protein also interacts with the TCRS8 enhancer ( M.L .
Waterman and K. Jones , unpubl . }
, as well as with transcriptional regulatory regions of the murine CD4 gene ( M.L .
Waterman , K. Jones , J. Siu , and S. Hedrick , unpubl . )
.
A double point mutation within the TCRa enhancer to 5'-PyCATAG-3 ' ) that eliminates the binding of affinity-purified TCF-la was found to decrease TCRa enhancer activity ~100-fold in vivo { Waterman and Jones 1990 } .
This mutation also destroyed the striking synergism observed between tandem copies of the TCRe « enhancer , effectively eliminating T cell-specific transcriptional activity in vivo , and reduced enhancer activity in an in vitro transcription system derived from Jurkat nuclei .
The strong activation provided by TCF-la « was highly dependent on its context with the TCRa enhancer , because constructs bearing up to four tandem copies of the isolated TCF-la-binding site did not demonstrate appreciable T cell-specific enhancer activity in vivo or in vitro in the absence of the flanking CRE and TCF-2 « /ets-binding site ( Waterman and Jones 1990 ) .
These observations raise the interesting possibility that TCF-la interacts directly with the CREB and TCF-2 « /ets proteins to activate the TCRa « enhancer .
To better define the role of this transcription factor in T lymphocytes , we have isolated and characterized cDNA clones encoding TCF-la .
Most strikingly , the T cell-specific HMG transcription factor TCF-1a transcription factor was found to harbor a single 68-amino-acid domain that is homologous to a conserved region of the high-mobility group ( HMG ) and other nonhistone chromosomal proteins .
This HMG motif is shown to be both necessary and sufficient for specific binding of TCF-1 « to its conserved pyrimidine-rich DNA element .
The cloned TCF-l « protein can also strongly activate the expression of a minimal promoter linked to the TCRa enhancer in nonlymphoid cells .
Expression of TCF-l « mRNA is highly restricted to the thymus and to T cell lines and can be further induced upon activation of an immature T cell line .
These data establish that TCF-1 « belongs to a new family of regulatory proteins related by the shared HMG box homol-ogy .
Other members of this family include hUBF , a ubiquitous RNA polymerase I enhancer-binding protein ( Jantzen et al .
1990 ] , and SRY , a testis-specific protein encoded on the Y chromosome that is implicated genetically in human sex determination ( Gubbay et al .
1990 ; Sinclair et al .
1990 ) .
TCF-l « is presently unique among this family in that its specific DNA-binding activity is determined by a single HMG motif , and it is required for the T cell-specific regulation of RNA polymerase II genes .
Results Amino acid sequence analysis of DNA affinity-purified TCF-1 « Our previous analysis of the T cell-specific TCF-l1a factor indicated that it was a unique protein that had not been implicated previously in T cell-specific transcriptional regulation ( Waterman and Jones 1990 ) .
To isolate cDNAs encoding TCF-l1a and further characterize this regulatory protein , ~200 pmoles { 16 pg ) of TCF-la was purified from Jurkat nuclear extracts , using a combination of conventional gradient and DNA affinity chromo-tography .
TCF-1a activity derives from a family of 57- to 53-kD proteins , each of which is capable of binding DNA specifically in Southwestern blotting as well as gel excision and renaturation experiments { Waterman and Jones 1990 ] .
Three distinct TCF-1a proteins copurified with a nonspecific DNA-binding protein of 116 kD during the purification procedure .
The proteins were resolved on a preparative denaturing SDS-polyacrylamide gel , transferred electrophoretically to an Immobilon filter , and visualized with Amido Black stain { Fig .
1A ) .
The major TCF-1a species ( a single band of 55 kD ) was eluted from the Immobilon membrane and digested with trypsin ( Fis-cher et al .
1991 ) .
Individual tryptic peptides were then purified by HPLC chromatography for microsequencing { Fig .
1B ) , and partial amino acid sequence information was obtained from six distinct peptides of the purified TCF-la protein ( Table 1 ) .
Sequence information from two of the peptides ( GS537 and G538 ) was used to design combined degenerate and `` guess-mer ' `` oligodeoxynucleotides to different regions of the TCF-1a @ gene , following the guidelines established by Lathe ( 1985 ) .
These DNA probes ( Table 1 } were an GENES & DEVELOPMENT 657 Downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on May 10 , 2019 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press Waterman et al .
SDS-PAGE - ) pont ) +116 ko .
Absorbance at 210 nm % Acetonitrile ( - 0 T T T T T T 0 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 Time ( min . )
C PCR ( -- Sure ___ } -mm mame -me UR ___ ] 538 542 537 540 539 541 Figure 1 .
- Purification of TCF-la for amino acid sequence analysis .
( A ) A total of 16 pg of purified Jurkat TCF-l1a cells was transferred to an Immobilon membrane following 10 % SDS-PAGE , and transferred proteins were visualized by Amido Black staining .
Brackets indicate the 57- to 53-kD TCF-la proteins ; a 116-kD nonspecific DNA-binding protein contaminant is also marked .
( - > ) The 55-kD band excised for tryptic digestion and amino acid sequencing .
( B ) Reverse-phase separation of TCF-1a tryptic peptides on a Vydac C-18 HPLC column ( dimensions : 2.1 x 150 mm ; pore size , 300 A , ; particle size , 5 um ) .
G537-G541 refer to six peaks that were collected manually and used for amino acid sequence determination .
[ C ) Schematic diagram of the 3.2-kb TCF-la cDNA clone .
Open boxes represent 5 ' and 3 ' UTRs , and the ORF is indicated with a line .
Black boxes show the relative location of the six sequenced tryptic fragments .
The hatched bar indicates the DNA fragment obtained by PCR amplification , using oligonucleotides complementary to peptides G538 and G537 { arrows } .
nealed to cDNA prepared from Jurkat poly [ ( A ) * RNA , The 203-bp PCR fragment was then used to screen a A and a 203-bp DNA fragment was selectively amplified by ZAP II Jurkat library for larger cDNA clones .
A total of polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) { see Materials and 80 positive clones were detected from a sereen of 250,000 methods ) .
DNA sequence analysis revealed a single open individual plaques , indicating that TCF-1a « is encoded by reading frame ( ORF ) that happened to encode the 20- a moderately abundant mRNA class [ 0.03 % of total Jur-amino-acid G542 peptide { Table 1 } , as well as the G537 kat poly { A ) * RNA ] .
The largest of 12 cDNA clones iso-and G538 peptides to which the degenerate oligodeoxy- lated by in vivo rescue ( clone 3.2 ) was 3.2 kb in length , in nucleotides were designed .
Thus , the 203-bp DNA frag- close agreement with the size observed for the largest ment specified three of the six TCF-1a peptides obtained mRNA ( see below ) .
The cDNA insert was sequenced on by protein microsequencing , strongly suggesting that the both DNA strands , using full-length and Exolll-deleted amplified DNA was derived from a portion of the templates in combination with overlapping oligodeoxy-TCF-la gene .
nucleotide primers .
In addition , a second cDNA insert Table 1 .
Amino acid sequence of tryptic TCF-1 « protein fragments Peptide - Position* - Residues `` - Sequence Probes® G537 89-104 16 EAPDDGKHPDGGLYNK 5-GG RTG YTT NCC ATC ATC RGG RTG YTCB3 G538 37-50 14 IFAEISHPEEEGDL 5'-CAY CCY GAR GAR GAR GCN GA-3 ' 539 348-353 6 YYELAR 540 142-159 18 VPVVOQPS ( HJAVHPLTPLIT G541 383-391 9 LQESASGTG 6542 55-74 20 SSLVNESEIIPASNGHEVAR Purified peptides were analyzed by Edman degradation on an Applied Biosystems Protein Sequencer 470A , equipped with an on-line PTH Analyzer 120A .
Recovery yields were between 33.6 and 1.5 pmoles of PTH amino acid per cycle .
*The location of each peptide within the coding sequence { amino acid is assigned to the putative initiator methionine } .
*The number of residues sequenced in each peptide .
`` A single histidine residue in peptide G540 ( in parenthesis ) was not assigned by sequencing .
Sequence of the degenerate oligonucleotides designed to encode peptides G537 and G538 , which were used for PCR amplification .
658 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on May 10 , 2019 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press { clone 3.1 ) was characterized and found to differ from the original cDNA by a short in-frame deletion , as described below .
Structural features of the TCF-1a @ protein predicted by the cDNA sequence Inspection of the sequence of the largest TCF-1 « clone { clone 3.2 ) revealed a single extended ORF capable of encoding a 399-amino-acid protein , preceded by an unusually long ( 655-bp ) 5 -untranslated leader segment and followed by a 1.211-kb 3 ' noncoding segment containing a canonical polyadenylation site ( shown schematically in Fig .
1C ) .
An initiator methionine codon that fits well with the Kozak consensus sequence ( Kozak 1990 ) is present starting at position +656 in the cDNA .
The ORF continues for 106 amino acid residues upstream of this methionine before a stop codon is reached in the 5'-untranslated leader region ( UTR ) .
The predicted ORF contains all six sequenced peptides from the 55-kD TCF-la protein [ Fig .
1C ) .
Southern analysis confirmed that TCF-la is encoded by the human genome and suggests that the protein is encoded by a single gene ( data not shown } .
Interestingly , the predicted molecular mass of the TCF-1 « protein ( 44.2 kD ) is at least 10 kD smaller than the apparent mass of the native TCF-la protein .
Therefore , either the TCF-la « protein migrates aberrantly in denaturing SDS gels or the putative initiator methionine at +656 is not the first amino acid of the synthesized protein .
For example , translation of TCP-l « could initiate at either of two leucine residues ( CUG codons ) located upstream of the first methionine ( AUG codon } , as has been observed with certain viral proteins { for review , see Kozak 1990 } .
To distinguish between these two pos-sibilities , we compared the apparent size of proteins synthesized in vitro from constructs that either contain or lack the 5 UTR .
In the construct lacking the leader , translation initiation was specified by a 21-amino-acid leader segment of the bacterial gene 10 protein .
A single TCF-la « protein , with an apparent molecular mass of 55 kD , was synthesized from each of these constructs ( Fig .
2 ) .
Thus , translation of the TCF-1 « protein must begin at the predicted initiator methionine [ ( + 656 ) to yield a 399-amino-acid protein that migrates in SDS-PAGE substantially larger than its predicted size .
In addition , RNA derived from the construct lacking the 5 UTR was translated at substantially higher levels than RNA derived from the full-length clone , indicating that the long GC-rich 5 ' leader region of the TCF-l1 « gene is highly inhib-itory to translation in vitro .
The discrepancy between the predicted and actual size is due to the particular composition of the amino-terminal two-thirds of the TCF-la protein , which is exceptionally rich in helix-distorting residues ( 14 % Proj , since fragments expressed from the carboxy-terminal one-third of the protein were found to migrate according to their predicted size { see Fig .
5 , be-low } .
The protein sequence predicted from the ORF of the largest TCF-la cDNA isolate { clone 3.2 ) is presented in T cell-specific HMG transcription factor youg ﬁéibg ‘ & { if f \ 0 « m » - < 4-55 Figure 2 .
In vitro synthesis of TCF-la « proteins .
( Left ) SDS-PAGE analysis of *°S-labeled proteins synthesized in translation reactions that lack added RNA ( lane 1 ) or contain either 2 or 4 ul ( lanes 2 and 3 , respectively ) of in vitro-synthesized TCF-la RNA .
Lane M contains *'*C-labeled protein standards ( Amer-sham ) .
{ Right ) SDS-PAGE analysis of proteins generated from reactions with no added RNA { lane 1 ) , with RNA from the en-tite 3.2 -kb TCF-l « clone ( +leader , lane 2 ) , or with RNA from a bacterial TCF-l « fusion protein that lacks the 5'-untranslated leader [ -leader , lane 3 ) .
Figure 3 .
We have also characterized a shorter cDNA isolate , clone 3.1 , which differs from the full-length cDNA in that it contains a precise 28-amino-acid in-frame deletion { amino acids 214-241 ; see Fig .
3A ) , which removes a short , serine- and threonine-rich segment of the protein .
The first notable feature suggested by the sequence of these clones is that the TCF-l « proteins are particularly rich in proline ( 12 % ) and serine ( 10 % ) resi-dues .
A basic region between amino acids 374 and 382 might serve as a nuclear localization signal .
An additional domain from amino acids 244-286 is notably rich in proline and histidine residues { 40 % proline plus his-tidine } and may be weakly related to the `` paired repeat `` domains near the amino termini of the Drosophila ho-meotic ems and bicoid genes ( Bum et al , 1989 ) .
Most strikingly , the carboxy-terminal one-third of the protein encompasses a 68-amino-acid domain { amino acids 295-362 ) that strongly resembles a conserved region of HMG and nonhistone chromosomal proteins ( NHPs ) .
This motif is also present in the Schizosaccharomyces pombe mating-type compatibility gene , Mc ( Kelly et al .
1988 ) , the human RNA polymerase I enhancer-binding protein hUBF { Jantzen et al .
1990 } , and SRY , the putative mammalian testis-determining factor ( Gubbay et al .
1990 ; Sinclair et al .
1990 ) .
Although the HMG protein family is thought to associate relatively nonspecifically with DNA , only slightly preferring AT-rich DNA segments , the hUBF transcription factor does bind specifically to an extended GC-rich segment of the RNA polymerase I enhancer ( Jantzen et al .
1990 ) .
Deletion of these HMG repeats prevents stable attachment to DNA affinity matri-ces , suggesting that the HMG motifs mediate specific binding of hUBF to DNA .
At least 33 residues within the 68-amino-acid HMG motif are identical or highly conserved among the previously characterized members of the HMG protein family GENES & DEVELOPMENT 659 Downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on May 10 , 2019 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press Waterman et al .
1 AAG ATC TAK AAMA CGG ACA TCT CCA CoG TGG GTG GCT CCT TTT TCT TTT TCT IT iff icc 61 ACC CTT CAG GAA GIG GAC GTT TCG TTA TCT TCT GAT CCT TGC ACC TTC TTT TGG GGA AMC 121 GGG GOC CTP CTG OCC AGA TCC CCT CIC TTT TCT CGG AAA ACA AAC TAC TAA GTC GGC MTC 181 CGG GGT AMC TAC AGT GGA GAG GGT TIC Cec Gea Gac GOG COG CCG GAC CCT CCT CTé cac 241 .
TTT GGG GAG GCG TGC TCC CIC CAG AAC CGG CGT TCT COG CGC GCA AAT CCC GSC cac ste 301 GGG TCG CGS GeT GGC CGC CGG GGC AGC CTC GTC TAG CGC GCG CCG OGC AGA CGC Coc oss 361 AGT CGC CAG CTA CCG CAs CCC TCG CCG CCC AGT GCC CIT CGG CCT Ose sec Gee Cec Cis 421 CGT CGS TCT CCG CGA AGC GGG AMA Gc6 CGG CoG CCG COG Ga TIC GGG OGC CGC CGC asc 481 .
TGC TCC GGC TGC CBé COG soe GCC OCG CGC TCG CCC GCC CCG CTT OCG COC GCT GIC CIG 541 CTG CAC GAA CCC TPC CAA CTC TCC TTT OCT CCC CCA CCC TTG AGT TAC COC TCT GIC TIT 601 CCT GCT GTT Gcé ose GTG CTC CCA CAG CGG AGC GA GAT TAC ACA GCC GOC GGG ATG CCC MET pro 2 661 CAA CTC TCC GGA GGA GGT GGC GGC GSC GGG GGG GAC CCG GAA CTC TGC GCC ACG Gac mag gin leu ser gly gly gly gly gly aly gly gly asp pro glu leu cys ala thr asp glu 22 © 721 ATG AIC CCC TIC AMG GAC GAG GGC GAT CAG AAG GAA AAG ATC TIC ATC AGT MET ile pro phe lys asp glu gly asp pro gin lys glu lys ile phe ala glu ile ser 42 & 8 C 781 CAT COC GAA GAG GAA GGC GAT TTA GCT GAC ATC AAG TCT TCC TTG GIG AAC GAG TCT GAA his pro glu glu glu gly asp leu ala asp ile lys ser ser leu val asn glu ser glu 62 841 .
ATC ATC CCG GCC AGC AAC GGA CAC GAG GIG GCC AGA CAA GCA CAA ACC TCT CAG GAG CCC ile ile pro ala ser asn gly his glu val ala arg gin ala gin thr ser gin glu pro 82 901 TAC CAC GAC AAG GCC AGA GAA CAC OCC GAT GAC GGA AMG CAT CCA GAT GGA GGC CIC TAC tyr his asp lys ala arg glu his pro asp asp gly lys his pro asp gly gly leu tyr 102 961 AAC AAG GGA CCC TCC TAC TCG AGT TAT TCC GGG TAC ATA ATG ATG CCA AAT ATG AAT AAC asn lys gly pro ser tyr ser ser tyr ser gly tyr ile met met pro asn met asn asn 122 1021 GAC CCA TAC ATG TCA AAT GGA TCT CTT TCT CCA CCC ATC CCG AGA ACA TCA AAT AMA GIG asp pro tyr met sar asn gly sar leu ser pro pro ile pro arg thr ser asn lys val 142 1081 CCC GTG GIG CAG CCA TOC CAT GCG GIC CAT CCT CTC ACC CCC CTC ATC ACT TAC AGT ac pro val val gin pro ser his ala val his pro leu thr pro leu ile thr tyr ser asp 162 1141 GAG CAC TTT TCT CCA GGA TCA CAC CCG TCA CAC ATC CCA TCA GAT GIC AMC TCC AAA CAA glu his phe ser pro gly ser his pro ser his ile pro ser asp val asn ser lys gin 182 1201 GGC ATG TCC AGA CAT CCT CCA GCT CCT GAT ATC CCT ACT TTT TAT CCC TTG TCT CCG GGT gly met ser arg his pro pro ala pro asp ile pro thr phe tyr pro leu ser pro gly 202 1261 GGT GTT GGA CAG ATC AOC CCA CCT CTT Goc TGG/CaA Gof CMG CCT GTA TAT CCC ATC ACG gly val gly gin ile thr pro pro leu gly trpigln gly gin pro val tyr pro ile thr 222 1321 GGT GGA TTC AGG CAA COC TAC CCA TCC TCA CTG TCA GTC GAC ACT TCC ATG TCC AGG|TIT gly gly phe arg gin pro tyr pro ser ser leu ser val asp thr ser met ser arg|phe 242 1381 TCC CAT CAT ATG ATT CCC GGT CCT CCT GGT CCC CAC ACA ACT GGC ATC CCT CAT CCA GCT ser his his met ile pro gly pro pro gly pro his thr thr gly ile pro his pro ala 262 1441 ATT GTA ACA CCT CAG GTC AMA CAG GAA CAT CCC CAC ACT GAC AGT GAC CTA ATG CAC GTG ile val thr pro gin val lys gin glu his pro his thr asp ser asp leu met his val 292 1501 AAG CCT CAG CAT GAA CAG AGA AAG GAG CAG GAG CCA AMA AGA CCT CAC ATT AAG AMG CCT lys pro gin his glu gin arg lys glu gin glu pro lys ary pro his ile lys lys pro 302 1561 CTG AMT GCT TTT ATG TIA TAC ATG AMA GAA ATG AGA GCG AAT GTC GTT GCT GAG TGT ACT lex asn ala pha mat leu tyr mat lys glu met arg ala asn val val ala glu cys'thr 322 1621 CTA AMA GAA AGT GCA GCT ATC AAC CAG ATT CTT GGC AGA McG TGG CAT GOC CTC TCC cot lon lys glu ser ala ala ile-asn gin ile leu gly arg arg trp his ala leu ser arg 342 1681 GAA GAG CAG GCT MAA TAT TAT GAA TTA GCA CGG AAA GAA AGA CAG CTA CAT ATG CAG CTT glu glu gin ala lys tyr tyr glu leu ala arg lys glu arg gin leu his met gin leu 362 1741 TAT CCA GGC TGG TCT GCA AGA GAC AAT TAT GGTJAAG AMAA AAG AAG AGG AAG AGA GAG AMA A tyr pro gly trp ser ala arg asp asn tyr gly|lys lys lys ys arg lys arg glu lys | 362 MET HMG CTA CAG GAA TCT GCA TCA GGT ACA GGT CCA AGA ATG ACA GCT GCC TAC ATC TGA AAC ATG 1801 - .
2 .
po- F -- - -y 3.2 Tan gin glu ser ly pro arg mat thr ala ala tyr ile OPA 32s la ser gly thr © MET < HMG 1661 GTG GAA AAC GAA GCT CAT TOC CAA OGT GCA AAG CCA AGG CAG CoA OCC CAG GAC CTC TIC go-k -y 3.100 1921 Tos AGA Toe AAG CTT GTT GAA AMC CCA cac TGT CTC CAC GGC CTG OCC AGT coa coc car 1981 AGG AAC ACT GAC ATC AMT TTT Acc CTG AGG TCA CTG CTA GAG ACG CIG ATC CAT AMA cac F L 2041 AAT CAC TGc CAA CoC CTC TTT CGP CTA CIG CA® GAG CCA AGT TCC AAA ATA AAG CAT MA Figure 3 .
Structure anfl sequence of two TCF-l « 2101 AAG GTT TTT TAA AAG GAA ATG TAA AMG CAC ATG AGA ATG CTA GCA GGC TGP GGG cca ccf cDNAs .
{ A ) Schematic diagram of the 3.2- and 3.1 -kb 2161 cag cas CT Tre Toc coc cat Arc Tec GIG CAC TTC CCA Gas cat CPT GCA TCC AMA ccf a a a 2221 GTA Acc cos car GoA Ces TAA CTT GGC Toc ATT Toc Cte TCA Téc GcA Act cca ccc TCF-l « cDNA isolates .
Dashed lines denote Fhe 5 2281 Acc AAC CAG CTA Toc ATC AGC Acc coa Gte GAG GAG TTC ATG GAM GG Trc cor crt tor and 3° UTRs .
The stippled box shows the location of 2341 trc Toc Tc ATT TTD Cpt TCP TPD CIT TTC TCC TAA AGC TTT TAT TTA ACA GTG CAA AMs a ; ; _ 2401 cat cor TTP Trt Tis CP TIT TAA ACT TGA ATT TTP TTA ATT TAC ACT TTT TAG TTT Taa the HMG motif .
( B ) Amino acid gquence of TC ?
e 2461 TTT TCP TGT ATA TPT TGC TAG CTA TGA GCT TTT AMA TAA AAT TGA AAG TIC TGG AAA AGT starting from the initiator methionine , as predicted 2521 TTG AMA TAA TGA CAT AMA AAG AAG CCT TCT TTT TCT GAG ACA GCT TGT CTG GTA act coc 2581 TTC TCP GTG AMT Toc CIG TAA CAC ATA GTG GCT Tor cos coc TTG TAA GGT GTT CAG Tas from the 3.2-kb cDNA cloné .
Brackgts encompass a 2641 AGC TAA ATA AAT GTA ATA GCC AAA CCC cac TCT GPT GGT AGC AAT Tos cas ccc TAT Trc 28-amino-acid ( 84-bp| domain that is absent in the 2701 AGT TTA TPT TTT CIT ore Trt Tor TCT PTT CPT TTT TTA AAC AGT AAA CCT TAA CAG ATG ami ; in j R 2761 cor Toa cca crc Tos TTP GCA GTG AAT TTT cat Thc TPP Cof TAT Cac Coc CPT orr ora 3.1-kb clone .
The 68- ~1n0-a ( 31d HMG domain is un 2821 AAA AGC CCA GcA CTT GAA TTG TTA TTA CIT TAA ATG TTC Tor ATT TGT ATC Tor TPT TAT derlined , and a basic region ( possible nuclear localiza- 2881 TAG CCA ATT AGT GGG ATT TTA Toc CAG TTG TTA AAA TGA GCA TIG ATG TAC CCA TTT ané ; ; 5 ; 2941 AAA AAA GCA AGC ACA GOC TTT GCC CAA AMc TGT CAT CCT AMC GTT TGT CAT TCC AGT tion signal ) is boxed .
The sequence of this clpne has 3001 AGT TAA TGT GCT GAG CAT TTT TTT AAA AGA AGC TTT GTA ATA AAA CAT TTT TAA AMA TTG been submitted to the EMBL/GenBank Data Libraries .
3061 TCA TTT AAA AMA AAA AAA AAA AAA CIC GAG GGG coo 660 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on May 10 , 2019 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ( Fig .
4 ) .
Overall , TCF-la contains 24 of the 33 shared residues and conserves 8 additional amino acid residues with the Mc and SRY proteins that are not found in the hUBF , NHP-6 , and HMG-1 proteins .
Only two residues are not found in TCF-la that are otherwise invariant among other members of the family : a proline residue at position 26 ( threonine in TCF-1 « @ ) and a basic amino acid at position 49 ( glutamine in TCF-l « ) .
Thus , TCF-l « is most similar overall to the Mc and SRY proteins .
The Mc , SRY , and TCF-1 @ proteins are distinguished further from hUBF by the fact that each contains only a single HMG box , whereas this motif is repeated at least three times in hUBF .
Chou-Fasman analysis of the TCF-l « protein sequence predicts that the HMG domain forms two extended 26-amino-acid « -helical stretches separated by a 6-amino-acid spacer segment ( Fig .
4 ) .
The hUBF protein has also been noted to contain a high « -helical propensity within its repeated HMG motifs { Jantzen et al .
1989 ) .
« -Helical repeats are found in a variety of DNA-binding domains , including those of the helix-loop-helix , helix-turn-he-lix , and homeo box proteins ( for review , see Johnson and McKnight 1989 ; Mitchell and Tjian 1989 ) .
Interestingly , the second half of the HMG domain displays weak homology to a portion of the DNA-binding domain of the c-ets oncogene ( Fig .
4 ) , suggesting that the HMG and ets DNA-binding protein families could be very distally re-lated .
A single HMG motif mediates specific binding of TCF-1a to DNA To compare the DNA-binding properties of the cloned and native TCF-la « proteins , we subcloned the TCF-l « gene ( clone 3.2 ) into a modified pGEMEX vector that utilizes the phage T7 RNA polymerase promoter ( Fig .
5A ; H. Mangalam , pers .
comm . )
.
TCF-la protein was then expressed in a bacterial strain ( [ pLys-s ) in which the a helix I _j w Doot T cell-specific HMG transcription factor T7 RNA polymerase is induced upon treatment with IPTG ( Studier et al .
1990 ] , and soluble bacterial fractions enriched for the induced TCF-l1a « protein were prepared ( Fig .
5B ) .
The induced bacterial TCF-la protein ( bTCF ) bound the human enhancer in a manner identical to that of the purified native TCF-la « protein ( hTCF } ) in DNase I footprint experiments ( Fig .
5C ) .
No specific binding to this DNA fragment was observed with unin-duced bacterial extracts { data not shown ) .
A double point mutation in the TCRa « enhancer destroyed the binding of bTCF in mobility-shift experiments ( Fig .
5D ) .
We have shown previously that this mutation eliminates the binding of the purified TCF-la protein in vitro and dramatically reduces TCRa enhancer activity in vivo ( Waterman and Jones 1990 ) .
Thus , the bacterially expressed cloned protein maintains the binding specificity observed with the native protein purified from Jurkat cells .
To map the DNA-binding domain of the TCF-1a « protein , two mutant cDNAs were constructed and expressed using these bacterial vectors .
One construct , AHMG , contains an in-frame deletion from amino acids 237 to 396 and , hence , encodes a protein lacking the HMG domain .
The second construct , called HMG , generates a truncated 162-amino-acid protein { ( amino acids 237-399 ) derived from the carboxy-terminal third of the protein that contains the HMG motif .
Soluble extracts containing induced bacterial TCF-la proteins were prepared and analyzed for enhancer-binding activity .
The DNA-binding properties of the truncated HMG-containing protein were found to be indistinguishable from those of the full-length TCF-la « protein in DNase I footprint [ Fig .
5C ) and Southwestern blot ( Fig .
5F ) } experiments .
In contrast , the AHMG protein did not bind the TCRa enhancer in either footprint , mobility-shift , or Southwestern blot experiments ( Fig .
5F , and other data not shown ) .
The Southwestern blotting procedure detects only specific protein-DNA interactions , because the renatured TCF-l « proteins were not bound by a la a helix II -C- -t- > - - : - - th - -Eo- Es- : -A : - -O - 60 mo moO 0 ® ® 0 6 we a- WHWWWB wo x m md me < a mb me mg mg co ro u x r o 0 u a o » u ww 0 0 o W Wo » o nd4rd4 « nn < n w ( a you > o u u ue x 0 ia 0 OM » 90 U # a er an » » # @ 080000 0 R ROW SAL 8 R E ® Q A E L & RIE E ® o L [ a ) x o L - NU TCric ® MOW Ronk $ KE viR X x M 8 ® r v & a o|njo ® - Y8T Mo caw Ks L ts ag k r 0 ® ® oi % 1® I L/ajr ® x - MU SRY v o W KL % as ® ow q : : ' q > §xgnl R E K - U saY : x WKA py r ® ® ® o Alia “ b # x r v @ s ® Kok - ver wur-6 ® MOW w w T a a D9 K o x K anges x v ® K o 1 a - nov mas-1 x K ¥ K8 P % x K K x a o r oz % o % r @ r w L a - xo var-x Q ws 0 L $ 0 K K® L : ® K n F o @ x os v @ a I k r - so var-a r M/W w Dp 8 % K KK Al a r F A a LA os fr x r o - su var-3 rr W o k r K w x rik rons rou vor x xw r 1 - wo ars-1 # Figure 4 .
- Comparison of different HMG domain sequences .
Shown is a 68-amino-acid region conserved among the following proteins : ( HU TCF-1 « ) Human TCF-1 « ; { YST Mc ) mating-type protein Mc from 8. pombe ; ( MU-SRY } murine SRY ; ( HU-SRY ) human SRY ; { YST NHP-6 ) yeast nonhistone protein 6 ; [ BOV-HMG-1 ) calf thymus histone mobility group protein-1 ; ( HU-UBF-1 , -2 , -3 ) three HMG box repeats of hUBF .
Highly conserved amino acids are shaded .
TCF-1 « residues that are conserved only with the Mc and SRY proteins are shown in open boxes .
A summary of the amino acid conservation is shown at top , where amino acids found in at least five of the nine HMG proteins are boxed ; residues shared only among TCF-1 « , Mc , and SRY are circled .
Dashes indicate nonconserved residues ; { B ) basic amino acids ; ( ip ) hydrophobic amino acids .
Two potential a-helices in the HMG region of TCF-la are indicated above the sequence .
A region of the DNA-binding domain of the murine c-ets-1 proto-oncogene that shows limited homology to the HMG motif is shown at bottom .
Asterisks ( * ) denote tryptophan repeats that are conserved among the c-ets protein family .
GENES & DEVELOPMENT 661 Downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on May 10 , 2019 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press Waterman et al .
SDS-PAGE SDS-PAGE < 1Ql° he 4 U8 HH t gill Figure 5 .
DNA-binding properties of TCF-1 « proteins expressed in bacteria .
( A ) Schematic illustration of bacterial TCF-1a expression vectors .
( FL ) Full-length protein expressed from the 3.2-kb cDNA ; ( AHMG ) mutant protein lacking amino acids 237-396 ; { [ HMG ) the truncated HMG-containing protein { amino acids 237-399 ) .
( B ) SDS-PAGE analysis of the induced bacterial FL ( 55-kD ) and HMG { 21-kD ) TCF-1a proteins .
( M ) Protein markers .
Aliquots containing 10 wl of total lysed bacterial extract obtained before ( - ) or after [ + ] induction with 0.5 mm IPTG ( Materials and methods ) were analyzed by 10 % SDS-PAGE and visualized by silver staining .
[ C ) DNase I footprint analysis of affinity-purified Jurkat TCF-la « cells ( native ; 0.6 and 1.5 ng ) or bacterial extracts containing the FL TCF-la ( 1.7 and 3.4 ug ) or truncated HMG-containing TCF-la « ( 0.5 and 1.0 pg ) proteins , respectively .
( D ) Gel mobility-shift analysis of the binding of bacterial TCF-l « ( 0.25 ug ; truncated HMG protein ) to the wild-type TCRa enhancer ( WT ) or to a double point mutant in the enhancer ( see Materials and methods ) .
[ E ) ( @ ) SDS-PAGE analysis of the induced bacterial FL ( 55-kD ) , AHMG { 27-kD ) , and HMG { ( 21-kD ) TCF-la proteins .
Note that both the FL and AHMG proteins migrate aberrantly on SDS-PAGE , whereas the shorter HMG protein migrates according to its predicted size .
[ F ) Southwestern analysis of bacterial TCF-1a proteins .
Proteins were transferred from 10 % SDS-PAGE to nitrocellulose and probed with oligonucleotides of the wild-type TCRa enhancer ( left , wild type ) or the double point mutant ( right , double point mutation ) .
( M ) '*C-labeled molecular weight markers ( Amersham } .
beled DNA probe containing a double point mutation in the TCRa enhancer [ Fig .
5F ) .
At present , little is known about how sequence-specific HMG proteins interact with their DNA targets .
To investigate whether the HMG proteins bind to DNA as dimers or other multimers , the truncated and full-length bacterial TCF-la proteins were mixed and the resultant protein-DNA complexes were analyzed by mobility-shift experiments .
Complexes specific for the truncated and full-length proteins formed , ; however , we failed to observe any complexes of intermediate size that would 662 GENES & DEVELOPMENT suggest the presence of mixed heterodimers , even when the mixture containing the two forms of the protein was denatured with guanidine-HCl ( to dissociate any sub-units ) and then renatured prior to the binding assay { data not shown ) .
We were unable to assess the binding of short and long proteins that had been cotranslated because TCF-1a proteins formed by in vitro transcription and translation are unable to bind specifically to DNA { data not shown ) .
We conclude that TCF-l « most likely binds to DNA as a monomer , although it remains possible that it forms a tightly associated dimer or other Downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on May 10 , 2019 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press multimer that can not be dissociated or reassembled following translation .
Thymus- and T cell-restricted expression of TCF-1 « mRNA We demonstrated previously that TCF-la « is a T cell-specific DNA-binding protein , present in nuclear extracts from Jurkat and CCRF-CEM T cell lines but not in extracts of a mature B cell line ( JY ) or the nonlymphoid HeLa cell line ( Waterman and Jones 1990 ) .
To determine whether this cell-type specificity results from transcriptional regulation of the TCF-la gene , we analyzed various cell lines and tissues for TCF-l « mRNA by using Northern blot experiments ( Fig .
6 ) .
A DNA probe consisting of the original PCR primer detected two TCPF-la mRNAs : an abundant species of 3.4 kb and a minor mRNA of 2.3 kb ( Fig .
6A ) .
TCF-la mRNA was detected in total RNA prepared from Jurkat cells ( a mature helper T cell ) , CCRF-CEM cells ( an immature T cell line } , and a subclone of CCRF-CEM { clone 1-CEM : an activated CEM line ) but was not present in JY ( an Epstein-Barr virus { [ EBV } -transformed B cell line ) or U937 cells ( a macrophage cell line ) .
TCF-la-specific mRNA was also present in the murine WEHI T-cell line and was found to be absent in the following murine B cell lines : S107 , P3 , MOPC , CH12 , and J558 cells ( data not shown ) .
A very low level of TCF-la mRNA could be detected in the b .o s ap ; > & ¢ & $ ¢ f A Ca l & A .
£2 `` : va & a. SEC & 3.4 kB 4 Q , ’ - SSS - % ** 2.3 kB » @ - 188 Figure 6 .
- TCF-lo mRNA expression is restricted to T cells .
( A ) Aliquots of 15 ug of total RNA purified from the different indicated cell lines were separated on a 1.0 % formaldehyde-agarose gel , transferred to Hybond N membrane , and probed with a random-primed DNA fragment corresponding to the original PCR probe ( amino acids 15-82 ; see Fig .
1C ) .
Arrows indicate the sizes of the two TCF-la-specific mRNAs and their migration position relative to 188 and 28S RNAs .
Size estimates were determined relative to a series of RNA marker standards that were run in parallel .
( B ) Aliquots of 20 ug of total RNA from different murine tissues were separated on a 1 % formaldehyde-agarose gel , transferred to Hybond N , and probed with a random-primed 450-bp DNA probe encompassing the HMG domain ( amino acids 253-399 ) .
Ethidium bromide staining of the 18S rRNA band is shown below each panel to indicate total RNA levels in each lane .
T cell-specific HMG transcription factor Namalwa B cell line { data not shown } ; however , TCF-l « DNA-binding activity was not observed in nuclear extracts from Namalwa cells .
Thus , it appears that the low level of RNA synthesized in the Namalwa B cell line is insufficient to generate substantial levels of TCF-l1a « protein or , alternatively , the gene may be regulated post-transcriptionally in these cells .
Overall , the TCF-l1 « gene appears to be regulated transcriptionally in a highly T cell-specific manner .
In addition , we noted that the immature CCRF-CEM T cell line expresses at least fivefold lower levels of TCF-la mRNA than are found in the mature Jurkat cell line [ Fig .
6A , cf .
lanes 1 and 2 ) .
A subclone of this CEM cell line { clone 1 ) , which differs from the parental cell line in that it possesses many of the features of an activated cell , including the expression of endogenous TCRa on the cell surface [ Shackelford et al .
1987 ) , was found to contain TCF-la mRNA at levels comparable to those found in Jurkat cells [ Fig .
6A , cf .
lanes 2 and 3 ) .
Similarly , TPA treatment of the uncloned parental CEM cell line increased TCF-la mRNA levels three- to fourfold ( data not shown ) .
We conclude that TCF-la mRNA is present in both mature ( Jurkat , WEHI ) and immature ( CEM ) T cell lines and can be induced upon activation of the immature CEM cell line .
To better define the overall pattern of expression of TCF-la mRNA , a DNA fragment corresponding to the HMG domain was used to probe a Northern blot containing RNA from different murine tissues , derived primarily from 4-week-old mice ( Fig .
6B ) .
Two murine TCF-la mRNAs were detected that are similar in size to the human TCF-1la mRNAs , although the 2.3-kb mRNA species was relatively more abundant in murine cells .
The two TCF-la « mRNAs were present at high levels in the thymus and were not observed in RNA derived from the brain , heart , lung , kidney , placenta , liver , or spleen .
Thus , TCF-la mRNA is expressed in a highly specific manner that is restricted to the thymus .
The absence of significant TCF-l « mRNA in the spleen is consistent with the relative lack of expression of this gene in mature B cell lines .
Transcriptional activation by the cloned TCP-1a protein The TCF-l « protein encoded by the full-length cDNA { clone 3.2 ) was tested for transcriptional activity in the Hela nonlymphoid cell line , which we have shown previously to lack endogenous TCF-l « DNA-binding activity .
For these experiments , a construct containing a single copy of the 95-bp core domain of the human TCRa enhancer positioned upstream of the HSV-1 TK promoter and luciferase gene { « ltk-LUC ; Waterman and Jones 1990 ) was used as the reporter gene .
Expression of the TCF-la protein was obtained by inserting the 3.2 cDNA clone ( the entire ORF and 161 bp of leader se-quences ) at position -19 of the human cytomegalovirus { hCMV ) promoter ( -1122 to -19 ) .
As a control , the altk-LUC reporter was cotransfected with pCMV-1 ( the expression vector lacking the TCF-1 « gene ) and the data GENES & DEVELOPMENT 663 Downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on May 10 , 2019 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press Waterman et al .
are presented as fold activation seen with pCMV-TCF-1l @ , relative to pCMV-1 .
We observed a strong ( 20-fold ) activation of the a « 1tk-LUC vector upon cotransfection with the pCMV-TCF-la « expression plasmid in Hela cells [ Fig .
7 ) .
This activation was slightly lower ( sixfold ) at higher ratios of the pCMV-TCF-la expression vector to the reporter gene , most likely due to competition from the strong hCMV promoter .
No increase in luciferase activity was observed upon cotransfection with pCMV-1 .
Furthermore , the cloned TCF-l1a protein was unable to activate constructs in which the wild-type TCRa enhancer was substituted with an enhancer containing a double point mutation in the TCF-la « -binding site { amitk-LUC , ; Fig .
7 ) , which destroys the binding of TCF-1a ( Fig .
5C ) .
Therefore , trans-activation in this nonlymphoid cell line requires the TCF-1 « protein as well as an intact TCF-la-binding site .
Discussion Among the key regulatory proteins important for T lymphocyte formation are likely to be transcription factors that activate and restrict the expression of cell-surface antigens associated with specialized T cell subtypes .
TCF-1a « , a T cell-specific transcription factor that activates the human T cell receptor Ca enhancer , is a good candidate for such a factor ( Waterman and Jones 1990 ] .
Indeed , TCF-l « is likely to play a varied role in T cell-specific gene expression because it binds to transcription control regions of antigen genes that are transcribed at both early { e.g .
, p56 `` ** , CD3 , and TCR8 ) , and relatively late stages of T lymphocyte development ( [ TCRa , CD4 ; ML .
Waterman , K. Jones , J. Siu , and S. Hedrick , unpubl . )
.
To further characterize this transcription factor , we isolated the gene for TCF-la , using amino acid sequence information derived from the purified Jurkat TCF-la protein .
Analysis of two related TCE-la cDNAs revealed that the amino-terminal two-thirds of the predicted Figure 7 .
Transcriptional activation by the cloned TCF-l « protein in nonlymphoid cells .
Reporter constructs for transfection analysis contained a single copy of the 95-bp core TCRa enhancer { « ltk ) upstream of the TATA box of the HSV-1 thymidine ki-nase ( tk ) } promoter and bacterial luciferase gene ( Luc ) , or a single copy of the enhancer bearing the double point mutation that eliminates the binding of TCF-l « ( amitk ; Waterman and Jones 1990 } , as indicated schematically at top .
These constructs were cotransfected into HeLa SL-3 cells along with an expression vector in which TCF-la protein ( the entire 3.2-kb clone ) was positioned downstream of the cytomegalovirus ( CMV ) immediate early gene promoter .
The pCMV-1 10.0 : 1.0 promoter plasmid lacking an insert was used as a control plasmid in separate cotransfection experiments .
Luciferase activity from the reporter gene was measured in light units , normalized by adjustment for protein , and the data are expressed as the fold induction observed relative to the luciferase reporter 2.5 : 1.0 TCF-l « protein is rich in proline , serine , and threonine residues , whereas the carboxyl terminus is strikingly devoid of proline residues and contains a 68-amino-acid domain conserved among the HMG protein family .
The two TCF-la cDNAs differ from one another by a short in-frame deletion that removes a serine- and threonine-rich segment that lies upstream of the HMG domain .
Comparison of these and other partially characterized cDNAs suggests that at least some of the diversity of the 57- to 53-kD TCF-1a « protein family may be generated by alternative splicing .
Northern blot analysis reveals that TCPF-la is encoded by two discrete mRNA species that are highly restricted to T cells , the larger of which correlates well with the size of the two characterized TCF-la cDNAs .
It will be interesting to learn the structure of cDNAs representative of the shorter transcripts and whether the variant cDNA forms encode proteins with altered activity .
The strong tissue specificity of expression , relative abundance of possible phosphorylation sites , and potential for splicing indicate that TCF-1a activity could be regulated both transcriptionally and post-transcriptionally in T lymphocytes .
One of the more striking findings presented here is that TCF-la is a member of the HMG protein family .
Until recently , it was thought that this family consisted solely of abundant chromosomal proteins that associate nonspecifically with DNA ; however , the discovery that the hUBF RNA polymerase I transcription factor contains several HMG motifs ( Jantzen et al .
1990 ) clearly demonstrated that at least some HMG proteins are involved in more complex regulatory phenomena .
More recently , the cDNA for SRY , a candidate for the human testis determining factor , was also found to contain an HMG domain ( Gubbay et al .
1990 ; Sinclair et al .
1990 ) .
Although specific gene targets for SRY have not yet been identified , the regulatory nature of the gene product strongly suggests that it is a specific DNA-binding protein .
The reiterated HMG motifs of hUBF were required l a 1 tk /LUC a ®® TATA [ __ LUC cmd fk / LUC Q ® Tata |__ LVC TCR & - /LUC : CMV/TCF-la a inltk + 3.2 F [ adtk + 3.2 ¢ mitk + 3.2 E altk + 3.2 Fold Activation plasmid cotransfected with a pCMV-1 control plasmid .
Shown are representative data obtained with two different ratios of TCRe-luciferase reporter and TCF-la « expression plasmids , as indicated at the left of the graph .
664 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on May 10 , 2019 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for its attachment to DNA affinity resins , implicating the HMG motif in DNA recognition ( Jantzen et al .
1990 } .
The DNA-binding properties of TCF-la differ significantly from those of hUBF in that the former recognizes a short conserved pyrimidine-rich element { Table 2 ) , whereas hUBF binds relatively weakly to an extensive GC-rich region of DNA , and different characterized hUBF-binding sites lack an obvious consensus motif ( Learned et al .
1986 } .
Indeed , the unusual binding properties of hUBF have led to the proposal that specific binding may require elements of DNA structure as well as sequence ( Jantzen et al .
1990 ) .
A second notable difference is that the primary structure of hUBF contains three or four repeated HMG boxes , whereas TCF-1 « , like the Mc and SRY gene products , contains only a single HMG motif .
Expression studies reveal that the single HMG box of the TCF-l1 « gene is both necessary and sufficient for specific binding to its pyrimidine-rich target site in DNase I footprint , mobility-shift , and Southwestern experiments ( Fig .
5 ) , and mixing experiments indicate that the protein may bind as a monomer .
Overall , the different members of the HMG protein family display a remarkable diversity in protein-DNA interactions , ranging from nearly nonspecific to highly specific binding , which appears to be determined by the exact composition of the HMG box .
The HMG domain of TCF-l « is predicted by Chou , Fasman analysis to consist of two large « -helical segments separated by a short spacer ( Fig .
4 ) which , overall , is somewhat reminiscent of the helix-turn-helix and he-lix-loop-helix DNA-binding structures .
The « -helices in the TCF-la-binding domain are considerably longer , however , and are not notably amphipathic in nature .
Shorter o-helical stretches are also present in hUBF ( Jantzen et al .
1990 ) and may be an important structural component of the HMG-binding domain .
The differences in the DNA-binding properties of TCP-l « and hUBF noted above may be specified by the distinct number of HMG boxes present in each protein , or , more likely , by individual amino acid differences within the HMG domains .
In this regard , it is interesting to note that TCF-la « shares an additional 8 residues with the yeast Mc and mammalian SRY proteins that are not found in hUBF or the other members of the HMG protein family .
This region of extended similarity is localized to both extremes of the HMG domain and may define a subclass of the HMG family that is related to DNA-binding sequence preference or to the degree of DNA-binding Table 2 .
Sequence comparison of TCF-1 « DNA-binding sites TCR a 5 `` GGCACCCITTITGAA-3 ' TCR a 5'-AAAGCCCTTIGAA-3 ' HIV-1 5 -AGCACGTCITTIGTA-3 ' Ick 5 < GGCCTCCTGIGAA-3 ' Shown are sites from various genes that are recognized with relatively high affinity by affinity-purified TCF-l1a « protein ( Waterman and Jones 1990 } .
The pyrimidine-rich core motif conserved among these sites is underlined .
T cell-specific HMG transcription factor specificity .
A recent report that some XY females contain point mutations in the amino-terminal half of the SRY HMG box ( Berta et al .
1990 ) indirectly underscores the importance of this region of the HMG motif .
Further identification of important amino acid residues in the HMG domain awaits site-directed mutagenesis of the HMG box , as well as identification of specific gene targets for the Mc and SRY proteins .
At present , we conclude from the analysis of TCF-l1a that a single HMG motif can be sufficient to interact with a specific target and that members of the HMG family are critical not only for transcription of RNA polymerase I genes and sex determination events but also for cell- and tissue-restricted activation of RNA polymerase II enhancers .
Interestingly , our computer search also indicated that the HMG motif is distally related to the DNA-binding domain of the c-ets proto-oncogene family ( for review , see Karim et al .
1990 ] .
In contrast to the members of the HMG family , however , c-ets contains only 3 of 7 invariant residues , and the homology is limited to the distal half of the HMG box ( Fig .
4 ) .
Contiguous with this region of c-ets lies a series of three `` tryptophan repeats `` that resemble the binding motif of c-myb and have been proposed to be an important component of the ETS DNA-binding domain ( Karim et al .
1990 ) .
These repeated tryptophan residues are not conserved in the HMG box , and there is no striking similarity between the c-ets- and TCF-la-binding sites , apart from the fact that both are short , pyrimidine-rich elements .
Nonetheless , the c-ets proteins are also important transcription factors in lymphoid cells ( Bosselut et al .
1990 ; Klemsz et al .
1990 ; Wa-sylyk et al .
1990 ) , and it will be interesting to learn whether the modest homology described here is reflected in the manner in which these two different classes of proteins interact with DNA .
Unlike the elements for other tissue-specific activa-tors , reiterated copies of the TCF-la-binding site do not create an enhanson , or minimal unit capable of independent enhancer activity in T cells ( Waterman and Jones 1990 ) .
Instead , it appears that the strong activity of TCF-la in T lymphocytes requires interactions with neighboring DNA-binding proteins .
For example , the minimal TCRa « a enhancer appears to absolutely require contiguous binding sites for three proteins : CREB { or a related CRE-binding protein } , TCF-l « , and a second T cell-specific factor , TCF-2 « .
Ho et al .
{ 1990 } have recently shown that the c-ets-1 protein can bind specifically to the TCF-2 « region of the enhancer and that the ets-binding sequence is critical for enhancer activity in vivo .
Although these data suggest that TCF-2 « is identical to c-ets-1 , several observations indicate that recognition of the TCF-2 « site is more complex .
First , TCF-2 « -binding activity appears to be restricted to T cells , whereas c-ets-1 is abundant in B cells and macrophages , as well as T cells ( Chen 1985 ; Bhat et al .
1989 ) .
In addition , Southwestern experiments indicate that TCF-2 « is a 63-kD protein ( M.L .
Waterman , unpubl . )
, substantially larger than the 54-kD c-ets-1 protein .
One possibility is that a T cell-specific protein binds in conjunction with c-ets-1 to the TCF-2 « -binding site or , al GENES & DEVELOPMENT 665 Downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on May 10 , 2019 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press Waterman et al .
ternatively , TCF-2 « might be a distinct , T cell-specific member of the c-ets protein family .
In contrast to c-ets , the expression of TCF-l « mRNA is highly restricted to the thymus and T cell lines and was not found in B cell lines , macrophages , or the spleen .
Somewhat lower levels of TCF-1la mRNA were detected in immature CCRF-CEM cells than in mature T cell lines , consistent with the low but detectable activity of the TCRa enhancer in these cells , and these low mRNA levels were increased in an activated CEM subclone as well as in TPA-treated CEM cells .
Although transcriptional induction of the TCF-la gene could contribute to the increased activity of the « -chain enhancer in TPA-treated CEM cells , it is unlikely to be the sole determinant of TCR induction because enhancer mutants that can no longer bind TCF-l1 « retain the ability to be induced by TPA ( Waterman and Jones 1990 ) .
Indeed , it is likely that the TCF-2 « /ets proteins are also induced upon activation of immature T cells ( Ho et al .
1990 ) and could function in combination with TCF-la « to activate the enhancer .
The finding that TCF-l1 « mRNA is present in immature T cells and in the thymus of young mice is consistent with its potential role in regulating the expression of genes expressed at relatively early times in T cell development .
Given the strong context dependence of transcriptional activation by TCF-1 « in T cell lines , it was somewhat surprising to find that the cloned TCF-la « protein is capable of activating minimal promoters bearing a single copy of the TCRa enhancer in nonlymphoid ( HeLa ) cells ( Fig .
7 ) .
This strong activation of the TCRa « enhancer was eliminated by a double point mutation that destroys the TCF-la-binding site .
These results indicate that TCF-la « can act alone in these cells to induce transcription in a binding site-dependent manner .
In contrast , the activity of the TCRa « enhancer in T cell lines was completely dependent on each of the three protein-binding sites ( CREB , TCF-la « , and TCF-2 « ) , and partial activity was not observed with constructs bearing only the CRE and TCF-la-binding sites .
Thus , the requirement for proper protein-protein interactions among the CREB , TCF-1 « , and TCF-2 « proteins appears to be more stringent in T lymphocytes versus nonlymphoid cells .
It will be interesting to learn whether TCPF-1 « can function synergisti-cally with TCF-2a/ets to induce the TCRa enhancer in nonlymphoid cells .
The differences observed between newly synthesized and endogenous TCF-la suggest that the activity of the protein may be modified in lymphocytes to become more dependent on protein-protein interactions .
A very similar observation was made for the erythroid-specific GATA-1 regulatory protein , which can activate minimal promoters bearing an upstream GATA-binding site in nonerythroid cells but can not activate these same promoters in erythroid cell lines ( for review , see Orkin 1990 ) .
Thus , the endogenous erythroid GATA-1 displays a more restricted requirement for activity than does GATA-1 protein that is newly synthesized in nonerythroid cells , which parallels the differences observed between endogenous and newly expressed TCF-l « .
TCF-la 666 GENES & DEVELOPMENT further resembles GATA-1 in that both proteins activate transcription from distal downstream enhancers as well as proximal promoters , are strikingly cell type-specific , and are present at both early and late stages of development .
The GATA-1 protein frequently functions in combination with a ubiquitous protein and a cell type-specific AP-1 protein , and its activity is strongly context dependent in erythroid cells ( Orkin 1990 } .
These conserved features of the GATA-1 and TCF-la proteins may be a hallmark of proteins that function in the early determination of cell type specificity .
A distinct member of the GATA family ( GATA-3 ) has recently been described that is localized to the thymus and brain [ Yamamoto et al .
1990 ) and therefore may also play a role in the transcriptional regulation of T cell-specific enhancers .
A potential GATA-binding site is located just outside of the minimal TCRa « enhancer core ; and although it is not required for the activity of the minimal enhancer in mature T cells , it may play a role in developmental regulation .
The converse situation exists in the human TCR8 enhancer , which contains a GATA sequence within the minimal region required for activity in y8~ T cell lines ( Redondo et al .
1990 ] , and a TCPF-la « -binding site that lies just beyond this region .
From the juxtaposition of the TCF-1a and GATA-3 mo-tifs , it is tempting to speculate that these two proteins play reciprocal roles in the coordinate regulation of the TCRe and TCR8 enhancers in primary thymocytes ( Mar-tinez-Valdez et al .
1988 ) or during T cell development .
The pronounced heterogeneity of the TCF-1a « protein family indicates that different members may play distinct roles in T cell development .
Recently , Clevers et al .
reported the characterization of a gene , TCF , that was isolated by screening a Agtll expression library with the TCF-la « -binding site from the CD3e gene enhancer ( van de Wetering et al .
1991 ) .
Interestingly , the gene is distinct from TCF-l « , although it demonstrates extensive homology throughout the HMG motif and is expressed predominantly in the thymus .
The predicted TCF protein is considerably smaller than TCF-la .
DNA affinity resins used for the purification of TCF-1 « did enrich for a collection of shorter proteins in the size range of TCF ( 38-42 kD } ; however , these proteins bound less avidly to the column and were eluted at lower ionic strength ( Waterman and Jones 1990 } .
It will be interesting to compare the DNA-binding specificities , transcriptional activation properties , and developmental pattern of expression of these two proteins directly and to learn whether other genes related to TCF-1a are also expressed specifically in the thymus .
Together , the CREB , TCF-1 « , and TCF-2 « /ets proteins create a powerful enhancer that is critical for tissue-specific expression of the « -chain of the T cell receptor .
The striking ability of the TCRa enhancer to regulate transcription over a very large chromosomal domain , which is critical for its normal function in activating distal upstream Va promoters , is also likely to be a contributing factor in the deregulated expression of errantly translo-cated proto-oncogenes during leukemogenesis ( Erikson et al .
1986 ) .
Further characterization of these factors , in Downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on May 10 , 2019 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press cluding the TCF-l « HMG protein , will help to determine how a small number of critical proteins interface to create this long-range , cell type-specific enhancer .
Materials and methods TCF-1 « purification and sequencing Large-scale DNA affinity purification of TCF-la from Jurkat nuclei { 1.76 x 10° cells ) was performed as described previously ( Waterman and Jones 1990 } to yield 16 ug of TCF-1 « protein at ~50 % purity .
To separate the TCF-l « proteins from a single contaminating 116-kD protein , the affinity-purified protein was precipitated with trichloroacetic acid [ 25 % ( wt/vol } ] and loaded onto a l-mm 10 % SDS-PAGE preparative gel .
Following electrophoresis , the proteins were transferred to an Immobilon filter { ( Millipore ) in transfer buffer ( TB ; 40 mm glycine , 50 mm Tris-HCl , 0.04 % SDS , 20 % methanol ) using an LKB Electrophor electrotransfer apparatus ( 1 mA/cm > for 1.5 hr at room temper-ature ) .
The Immobilon membrane was stained with Amido Black ( 0.1 % in methanol/acetic acid/H,0 ; 45 ; 10 : 45 ) for 2 min at room temperature , followed by three changes of a destain solution [ methanol/acetic acid/H,0 ; 450 : 10 : 40 { vol/vol/vol } } and two separate washes with double-distilled water .
Library construction and screening A Agtll expression library was constructed with 5 ug of poly ( A ) * RNA isolated from Jurkat cells ( Chomczynski and Sacchi 1987 ) .
cDNA was made from the poly { A ) -selected RNA using a A ZAP II kit ( Stratagene ) , ligated into A ZAP II arms , and packaged using Gigapack Gold ( Stratagene ) .
The library was found to contain 1.1 x 10° independent recombinant clones and was then amplified before use .
A total of 250,000 individual plaques were transferred to Hy-bond-N filters ( Amersham ) and screened with a 203-bp PCR fragment that had been labeled by random priming to a sp .
act .
of 1.7 x 10° dpm/ug .
Hybridizations were carried out in 50 % formamide , 1 % SDS , 5x Denhardt 's solution , 5x SSPE , 20 ug/ml of salmon sperm , and 1 x 10° cpm/ml of probe , at 42°C for 12 hr .
The final wash of filters was in 1x SSPE/O.1 % SDS , at 65°C for 30 min .
Twelve positive plaques were purified through four rounds of plating and rescued into XL1 Blue bacteria by coinfection with the R408 helper phage ( Stratagene ) .
In vivo excision of the inserts from the A ZAP II vector to a Bluescript SK environment was performed according to the manufacturer 's suggestions { Stratagene } .
PCR amplification A total of 1 ug of Jurkat poly { A ) * RNA ( Chomezynski and Sacchi 1987 ) was treated with AMV reverse transcriptase ( Life Sci-ences ) by priming with 0.5 ug of oligo ( dT ) ( Promega ) , according to the protocol of Frohman et al .
( 1988 ) , except that the reaction was terminated by diluting it fivefold with water , and freezing to -20°C .
An aliquot of this cDNA pool { 100 ng ) was used for each PCR reaction at a final buffer concentration of 10 mm Tris-HCI ( pH 8.4 ) , 50 mm KCI , 0.01 % gelatin , 3 mm MgCl , , 200 um each dNTP , 1 pum each degenerate primer , and 2.5 units of Amplitaq polymerase ( Cetus ) .
Degenerate oligodeoxynucleotide primers ( Table 1 ) were purified from 15 % native polyacrylamide gels prior to use .
Each reaction was incubated at 94°C for 3 min and cycled 35 times at 94°C for 1 min , 55°C for 2 min , and 72°C for 3 min , followed by further incubation of the reactions for 5 min at 72°C .
Resultant PCR products were analyzed on agarose gels , and the 203-bp fragment was purified from a 1.5 % agarose T cell-specific HMG transcription factor gel and subcloned into the Smal site of Bluescript SK- .
This 203-bp fragment was then sequenced using the T3 and KS ( Strat-agene ) primers .
DNA sequence analysis The largest insert ( 3.2 kb ) was sequenced with Sequenase enzyme ( U.S. Biochemicals ) by using a combination of specific oligodeoxynucleotide probes and various Exolll 3'-deleted tem-plates .
Both DNA strands were sequenced within the 5'-UTR and ORF regions of the gene .
Bacterial expression TCF-la cDNA clones and subclones were inserted into a derivative of the bacterial expression vector , pGEMEX ( Promega ) , engineered to remove most of the bacterial gene 10 gene-coding sequences ( H. Mangalam , unpubl . )
.
Final clones contained an in-frame fusion with 21 amino acids of gene 10 at the Hincll site in the vector polylinker .
All plasmids were sequenced to confirm that the construct and translation frame were correct .
For expression , plasmids were transformed into pLysS bacteria { Studier et al .
1990 ) .
Cultures { 200 ml ) were inoculated with 0.5 ml of an overnight culture and grown at 37°C until bacteria reached a density of ODsop = 0.7 .
TCF-la « expression was then induced with 0.5 mm IPTG for 2 hr at 37°C .
Bacteria were harvested and lysed in 1x lysis buffer [ LB : 60 mm KCl , 20 mm HEPES ( pH 7.9 ) , 1 mm EDTA , 5 mm MgCl , , 2 mm dithiothreitol { DTT } , 0.1 mm phenyImethylsulfonyl fluoride ( PMSF ) , 2 mg/ml of benzamidine , 1 ug/ml of pepstatin A , 4 pg/ml of leupeptin , 10 ug/ral of aprotinin , and 20 pg/ml of soybean trypsin inhibitor ] , with two consecutive cycles of freezing and thawing .
After a 45-min spin at 50,000 rpm , the supernatant was brought up to 20 % glycerol and stored at - 100°C .
The pellet was resuspended in 4 m guanidine-HCl and placed on a rotating wheel for 30 min at 4°C .
Insoluble material was separated by centrifugation for 30 min at 50,000 rpm .
The guanidine-HCl was removed from the extract by stepwise dialysis at 4°C .
Glycerol was added to 20 % , and the extract was centrifuged to remove insoluble protein before freezing .
DNA-binding procedures Bacterial extracts { amounts indicated in figure legends } were incubated with 1 ug of salmon sperm DNA in a 14-pul reaction containing 1 X EMSA buffer ( 10 mm HEPES-KOH at pH 7.8 , 2.5 mM EDTA , 5 mm spermidine , 10 % glycerol , 1 mm DTT , 0.5 mm PMSF , and 67 mm KCI ) at 0°C for 15 min .
The °°P-labeled oligodeoxynucleotide probe ( 0.2-0.5 ng ; 1 wl ) was then added and incubated for 10 min at room temperature .
Ficoll dye ( 20 % Ficoll , 0.1 % Bromphenol blue ) was added to 2 % , and the entire reaction was loaded directly onto a 6 % /0.5 % TBE/1.5-mm native polyacrylamide gel .
The sequence of the wild-type TCRa enhancer oligodeoxynucleotide was 5 -GATCTAGGGCACCC-TTTGAAGCTCT-3 ' , and the sequence of the double point mutant was Southwestern experiments were performed as described ( Waterman and Jones 1990 } except that hybridization solutions contained 4.5 pg/ml of salmon sperm DNA .
Oligodeoxynucleotide probes end-labeled with *°P were identical to those described for mobility-shift experiments .
In vitro protein synthesis Twenty micrograms of each of the indicated plasmids was lin-earized with HindllI , phenol-extracted , and precipitated with GENES & DEVELOPMENT 667 Downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on May 10 , 2019 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press Waterman et al .
ethanol .
RNA was synthesized by using T7 polymerase and 5 ug of the linear templates in reactions that were incubated for 1 hr at 37°C , according to the manufacturer 's suggestions ( Promega ) .
Reactions were terminated by RQ1l DNase treatment ( 5 units , Promega ) for 15 min at 37°C .
RNA was phenol-extracted , ethanol-precipitated , and resuspended in 50 pl of DEPC-treated distilled water .
An aliquot of RNA ( 2 pl ) was translated by using the rabbit reticulocyte lysate , according to the manufacturer 's protocol ( Promega ) , with 2.5 pul ( 37.5 mCi ) of A total of 5 ul of each reaction was then analyzed by denaturing SDS-PAGE ( 10 % ) .
After electrophoresis , the gel was soaked in Enlightening ( DuPont ] for 30 min before drying and exposing to XAR-5 film .
Northern blot analysis Northern blots of murine RNA from tissues of 4-week-old mice { except the placenta RNA , which was derived from a 17 day-old fetus ) were generously provided by Gail Baughman ( The Salk Institute ) .
Total RNA was isolated from the indicated tissues or cell lines using the guanidine/phenol method ( Chomezynski and Sacchi 1987 ) .
Each RNA was mixed with 0.8 pg of ethidium bromide ( to visualize the RNA in subsequent blotting steps ) and separated on a 1 % formaldehyde-agarose ( HEPES ) gel at 40 mA for 16 hr .
The RNA was blotted to Hybond N membrane by adsorption overnight in 20 % SSC and fixed to the nylon support by UV irradiation .
Blots were then probed with random-primed labeled DNA following 3 hr of prehybridization at 65°C in 50 mm PIPES , 100 mm NaCl , 50 mm sodium phosphate , 1 mm EDTA , and 5 % SDS .
Hybridization proceeded overnight in the same buffer at 65°C { except for blots with murine RNA samples , which were hybridized at 60°C ) at a DNA probe concentration of 1 x 10° cpm/ml .
Blots were washed once at room temperature in 100 ml of 5 % SDS , 1x SSC { 0.015 m sodium citrate , 0.15 m NaCl ) , followed by a 20-min wash at the hybridization temperature [ Virca et al .
1990 ) .
Northern blots were exposed to film overnight with a screen .
RNA markers ( 0.24- to 9.5-kb RNA ladder ; BRL ] were loaded alongside samples and visualized by reprobing the blot with random-primed A DNA .
Cell culture and transient expression experiments Hela SL3 cells ( a subclone adapted for spinner culture } were maintained in 1x Joklik 's media supplemented with 5 % bovine calf serum .
For transient expression experiments , luciferase plasmids were cotransfected with the indicated TCF-l1a or control expression plasmids using the DEAE dextran-chloroquine method described previously ( Waterman and Jones 1990 } .
Acknowledgments We thank Connie Hansen for assistance with construction of the A ZAP II cDNA library , Ralf Schoepfer for advice on various aspects of the cloning procedure , Gail Baughman for sharing murine Northern blots , Harry Mangalam for technical advice and reagents for bacterial expression of TCF-la , and both Harry Mangalam and Steven Koerber for assistance in searching data banks .
We also thank Christine Schar and Melissa Weiss for excellent technical assistance and members of the Jones lab for their advice during the course of these experiments .
This research was funded by grants from the National Institutes of Health , the Mathers Foundation , and the California Universi-tywide State Task Force on AIDS .
W.H.F .
is a Clayton Foundation Investigator supported by the Clayton Foundation for Re 668 GENES & DEVELOPMENT search , California Division .
M.L.W .
is supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the American Cancer Society , and K.J .
is a member of the Pew Biomedical Scholars Program .
The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by payment of page charges .
This article must therefore be hereby marked `` advertisement `` in accordance with 18 USC section 1734 solely to indicate this fact .
References Alt , EW .
, TLK .
Blackwell , and G.D. Yancopoulos .
1987 .
Development of the primary antibody repertoire .
Science 238 : 1079-1087 .
Berta , P. , J.R. Hawkins , A.H. Sinclair , A. Taylor , BL .
Griffiths , P.N .
Goodfellow , and M. Fellous .
1990 .
Genetic evidence equating SRY and the testis-determining factor .
Nature 348 : 448-450 .
Bhat , NK .
, KL Komschlies , S. Fujiwara , RJ .
Fisher , BJ .
Mathieson , T.A .
Gregorio , HA .
Young , J.W .
Kasik , K. Ozato , and T.S .
Papas .
1989 .
Expression of ets genes in mouse thymocyte subsets and T cells .
J. Immunol .
142 ; 672-678 .
Bosselut , R. , J.F .
Duvall , A. Gegonne , M. Bailly , A. Hemar , J. Brady , and J. Grysdael .
1990 .
The product of the c-ets-1 proto-oncogene and the related Ets2 protein act as transcriptional activators of the long terminal repeat of human T cell leukemia virus HTLV-1 .
EMBO J .
9 : 3137-3144 .
Burri , M. , Y. Tromvoukis , D. Bopp , G. Frigerio , and M. Noll .
1989 .
Conservation of the paired domain in metazoans and its structure in three isolated human genes .
EMBO / .
8 : 1183-1190 .
Chen , JH .
1985 .
The proto-oncogene c-ets is preferentially expressed in lymphoid cells .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
5 : 2993-3000 .
Chien , Y. , M. Iwashima , K.B .
Kaplan , J.F .
Elliot , and MM .
Davis .
1987 .
A new T-cell receptor gene located within the alpha locus and expressed early in T-cell differentiation .
Na ture 327 : 677-682 .
Chomezynski , P. and N. Sacchi .
1987 .
Single-step method of RNA isolation by acid guanidinium thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform extraction .
Anal .
Biochem .
162 : 156-159 .
Davis , M.M .
and P.J .
Bjorkman .
1988 .
T-cell antigen receptor genes and T-cell recognition .
Nature 334 : 395-401 .
Erikson , J. , L. Finger , L. Sun , A. Ar-Rushdi , K. Nishikura , J. Minowada , J. Finan , E.S .
Emanuel , P.C .
Nowell , and C.M .
Croce .
1986 .
Deregulation of c-myc by translocation of the a-locus of the T-cell receptor in T-cell leukemias .
Science 232 : 884-886 .
Fischer , W.H .
, D. Karr , B. Jackson , M. Park , and W. Vale .
1991 .
Micro sequence analysis of proteins purified by gel electro-phoresis .
Methods Neurosci .
6 : 69-84 .
Frohman , M.A .
, MK .
Dush , and G.R .
Martin .
1988 .
Rapid production of full-length cDNAs from rare transcripts : Amplification using a single gene-specific oligonucleotide primer .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
85 ; $ 998-9002 .
Furley , AJ .
, S. Mizutani , K. Weilbaecher , H.S .
Dhaliwal , A.M. Ford , L.C .
Chan , HV .
Molgaard , B. Toyonaga , T. Mak , P. van den Elsen , D. Gold , C. Terhorst , and M.F .
Greaves .
1986 .
Developmentally regulated rearrangement and expression of genes encoding the T cell receptor-T3 complex .
Cell 46 : 75-87 .
Gubbay , J. , J. Collignon , P. Koopman , B. Capel , A. Economou , A. Munsterberg , N. Vivian , P. Goodfellow , and R. Lovell-Badge .
1990 .
A gene mapping to the sex-determining region of the mouse Y chromosome is a member of a novel family of em-bryonically expressed genes .
Nature 346 : 245-250 .
Havran , W.L .
and J.P. Allison .
1988 .
Developmentally ordered Downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on May 10 , 2019 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press appearance of thymocytes expressing different T cell antigen receptors , Nature 335 : 443-445 .
Ho , I.-C. , L-H. Yang , G. Morle , and J.M .
Leiden .
1989 .
A T-cell-specific transcriptional enhancer element 3 ' of Ca in the human T-cell receptor a locus .
Proc .
Natl Acad .
Sci .
86 : 6714-6718 .
Ho , I.-C. , N.K .
Bhat , LR .
Gottschalk , T. Lindsten , C.B .
Thompson , T.S .
Papas , and JM .
Leiden .
1990 .
Sequence-specific binding of human Ets-1 to the T cell receptor a gene enhancer .
Science 250 : 814-818 .
Ho , I.-C. and J.M .
Leiden .
1990 .
The Ta2 nuclear protein binding site from the human T cell receptor « enhancer functions as both a T cell-specific transcriptional activator and repres-sor .
J. Exp .
Med .
1721 1443-1449 .
Jantzen , H.-M. , A. Admon , S.P .
Bell , and R. Tjian .
1990 .
Nucle-olar transcriptional factor hUBF contains a DNA-binding motif with homology to HMG proteins .
Nature 344 : 830-836 .
Johnson , P.F .
and S.L .
McKnight .
1989 .
Eukaryotic transcriptional regulatory proteins .
Annu .
Rev .
Biochem .
58 : 799-839 .
Karim , FD .
, LD .
Urness , C.S .
Thummel , M.J. Klemsz , SR. McKercher , A. Celada , C. Van Beveran , R.A. Maki , CV .
Gunther , J.A .
Nye , and B.J .
Graves .
1990 .
The ETS-domain : A new DNA-binding motif that recognizes a purine-rich core DNA sequence .
Genes & Dev .
4 : 1451-1453 .
Kelly , M. , J. Burke , M. Smith , A. Klar , and D. Beach .
1988 .
Four mating-type genes control sexual differentiation in the fission yeast , EMBO J .
7 : 1537-1547 .
Klemsz , M.J. , S.R .
McKercher , A. Celada , C. Van Beveran , and R.A. Maki .
1990 .
The macrophage and B cell-specific transcription factor PU.1 is related to the ets oncogene .
Cell 61 : 113-124 .
Kozak , M. 1990 .
Downstream secondary structure facilitates recognition of initiator codons by eukaryotic ribosomes .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
87 : 8301-8305 .
Krimpenfort , P. , R. de Jong , Y. Uematsu , Z. Dembic , S. Ryser , H. von Boehmer , M. Steinmetz , and A. Berns .
1988 .
Transcription of T cell receptor B-chain genes is controlled by a downstream regulatory element .
EMBO J .
7 : 745-750 .
Lathe , R. 1985 .
Synthetic oligonucleotide probes deduced from amino acid sequence data : Theoretical and practical consid-erations .
J. Mol .
Biol .
183 : 1-12 .
Learned , R. M. , TK .
Learned , MM .
Haltiner , and RT .
Tjian .
1986 .
Human rRNA transcription is modulated by the coordinate binding of two factors to an upstream control element .
Cell 45 : 847-857 .
Marrack , P. and J. Kappler .
1987 .
The T cell receptor .
Science 238 : 1073-1079 .
Martinez-Valdez , H. , E. Thompson , and A. Cohen .
1988 .
Coordinate transcriptional regulation of « and 8 chains of the T-cell antigen receptors by phorbol esters and cyclic adenos-ine 5'-monophosphate in human thymocytes .
J. Biol .
Chem .
263 : 9561-9564 , McDougall , S. , C.L .
Peterson , and K. Calame .
1988 .
A transcriptional enhancer 3 ' of CB2 in the T cell receptor B locus .
Science 241 : 205-208 .
Mitchell , PJ .
and R. Tjian .
1989 .
Transcriptional regulation in mammalian cells by sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins .
Science 245 : 371-378 .
Orkin , S.H .
1990 .
Globin gene regulation and switching : Circa 1990 .
Cell 63 : 665-672 .
Paillard , F. , G. Sterkers , and C. Vaquero .
1990 .
Transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of TcR , CD4 and CD8 gene expression during activation of normal T lymphocytes .
EMBO J .
9 : 1867-1872 .
T cell-specific HMG transcription factor Pardoll , D.M .
, BJ .
Fowlkes , J.A .
Bluestone , A. Kruisbeck , W.L .
Maloy , J.E .
Coligan , and R.D .
Schwartz .
1987 .
T cell receptors during thymocyte development .
Nature 326 : 79-81 .
Redondo , J.M .
, S. Hata , C. Brocklehurst , and M.S .
Krangel .
1990 .
A T cell-specific transcriptional enhancer within the human T cell receptor 8 locus .
Science 247 : 1225-1229 .
Shackelford , D.A .
, A.V .
Smith , and LS .
Trowbridge .
1987 .
Changes in gene expression induced by a phorbol diester : Expression of IL-2 receptor , T3 , and T cell antigen receptor .
J. Immunol .
138 : 613-619 .
Sinclair , A.H. , P. Berta , M.S .
Palmer , J. Ross Hawkins , B.L .
Griffiths , M.J. Smith , JW .
Foster , A.-M. Frischauf , R. Lovell-Badge , and P.N .
Goodfellow .
1990 .
A gene from the human sex-determining region encodes a protein with homology to a conserved DNA-binding motif .
Nature 346 : 240-244 .
Strominger , J.L .
1989 .
Developmental biology of T cell recep-tors .
Science 244 : 943-950 .
Studier , FW .
, A.H. Rosenberg , J.J. Dunn , and J.W .
Dubendorff .
1990 .
Use of TZ RNA polymerase to direct expression of cloned genes .
Methods Enzymol .
185 : 60-89. van de Wetering , M. , M. Oosterwegel , D. Dooijes , and H. Clevers .
1991 .
Identification and cloning of TCF-1 , a T lym-phocyte-specific transcription factor containing a sequence-specific HMA box .
EMBO J .
10 ; 123-132 .
Virca , G.D. , W. Northemann , BR .
Shiels , G. Widera , and S. Broome .
1990 .
Simplified Northern blot hybridization using 5 % sodium dodecyl sulfate .
Biotechniques 8 : 370-371 .
Wasylyk , B. , C. Wasylyk , P. Flores , A. Begue , D. Leprince , and D. Stehelin .
1990 .
The c-ets proto-oncogenes encode transcription factors that cooperate with c-Fos and c-Jun for transcriptional activation .
Nature 346 : 191-193 .
Waterman , ML .
and K.A .
Jones .
1990 .
Purification of TCF-1a , a T cell-specific transcription factor that activates the human T cell receptor Co-gene enhancer in a context-dependent manner .
New Biol .
2 ; 621-636 .
Wilkinson , M.F .
and C.L .
MacLeod .
1988 .
Induction of T cell receptor- « and -B mRNA in SL12 cells can occur by transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms .
EMBO J .
7 : 101-109 .
Winoto , A. and D. Baltimore .
19892 .
A novel , inducible and T cell-specific enhancer located at the 3 ' end of the T cell receptor a locus .
EMBO J .
8 : 729-733. .
1989b .
af lineage-specific expression of the « T cell receptor gene by nearby silencers .
Cell 59 : 649-655 , Yamamoto , M. , L. Ko , M. Leonard , H. Beug , S. Orkin , and J. Engel .
1990 .
Activity and tissue-specific expression of the transcription factor NF-El multigene family .
Genes & Dev .
4 : 1650-1662 .
GENES & DEVELOPMENT 669 Downloaded from genesdev.cshlp.org on May 10 , 2019 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press > t N-t $ & Development A thymus-specific member of the HMG protein family regulates the human T cell receptor C alpha enhancer .
M L Waterman , W H Fischer and K A Jones Genes Dev .
1991 , 5 : Access the most recent version at doi:10.1101/gad.5.4.656 References _ This article cites 47 articles , 18 of which can be accessed free at : http : /genesdev.cshlp.org/content/5/4/656.full.html # ref-list-1 License Email Alerting _ Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the top Service - `` ight corner of the article or click here .
CRISPR KO , CRISPRa , CRISPRi libraries .
CELLECTA Custom or genome-wide .
Copyright © Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
