JournAL or ViRoLOGY , June 1991 , p. 2868-2874 0022-538 X/91/062868-07 $ 02.00/0 Copyright © 1991 , American Society for Microbiology Vol .
65 , No .
6 Differentiation-Associated Expression of the Epstein-Barr Virus BZLF1l Transactivator Protein in Oral Hairy Leukoplakia L. S. YOUNG , `` * R. LAU , `` M. ROWE , G. NIEDOBITEK , `` G. PACKHAM , * F. SHANAHAN , `` D. T. ROWE , `` D. GREENSPAN , * J. S. GREENSPAN , * A .
B. RICKINSON , ' anp P. J. FARRELL Department of Cancer Studies , Cancer Research Campaign Laboratories , The Medical School , University of Birmingham , P.O .
Box 363 , Birmingham B15 2TT , ' and Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research , St. Mary 's Hospital Medical School , London W2 IPG , `` United Kingdom , and Oral AIDS Center and Department of Stomatology , School of Dentistry , University of California , San Francisco , California 94143-0512 `` Received 6 December 1990/Accepted 7 February 1991 The BZLF1 protein of Epstein-Barr virus ( EBV ) is a key immediate-early protein which has been shown to disrupt virus latency in EBV-infected B cells .
We have generated a monoclonal antibody , BZ1 , to BZLF1 which reacts in immunohistology , immunoblotting , and immunoprecipitation and which recognizes both the active , dimeric form and the inactive , monomeric form of the protein .
Biopsies of oral hairy leukoplakia , an AIDS-associated lesion characterized by high-level EBV replication , were examined by immunohistochemistry using the BZ1 monoclonal antibody .
A differentiation-associated pattern of BZLF1 expression was observed , BZ1 reacting with nuclei of the upper spinous layer of the lesion .
This finding suggests that the BZLF1 promoter may be regulated by the degree of squamous differentiation .
A comparison of in situ hybridization to EBV DNA and viral capsid antigen staining with BZ1 reactivity suggested that BZLF1 expression precedes rampant virus replication .
The inability to detect EBV in the lower epithelial layers of oral hairy leukoplakia raises questions concerning the nature of EBV latency and persistence in stratified squamous epithelium .
Oral hairy leukoplakia ( OHL ) is a recently described epithelial lesion occurring in association with AIDS ( 7 ) .
OHL presents as raised white areas usually on the lateral border of the tongue .
The histological appearance is characterized by an intracellular edema of spinous cells , alterations of the nuclei such as basophilic nuclear inclusions , and superficial parakeratosis ( 11 ) .
Although this histology resembles that observed in papillomavirus-associated infections , there has been no reliable demonstration of such an infection in OHL .
Initial examination of OHL under the electron microscope showed the presence of a herpes-type virus particle which was later confirmed as Epstein-Barr virus ( EBV ) both by DNA hybridization studies and by immunohistochemical analysis with antibodies directed against EBV antigens of the virus lytic cycle , e.g .
, viral capsid antigen ( VCA ) and early antigen ( EA-D and EA-R ) ( 8 ) .
On treatment with acyclovir , an inhibitor of the herpesvirus DNA polymerase , OHL was found to regress ( 4 ) , implicating EBV as an etiological agent in the development of this nonmalignant epithelial proliferation .
In situ hybridization to EBV DNA has revealed replicating EBV distributed focally in the more differentiated layers of OHL ( 2 , 11 ) .
This is in agreement with the pattern of immunostaining observed by using either polyclonal human sera to late viral antigens or monoclonal antibodies ( MAbs ) to VCA , early antigens ( EA-D and EA-R ) , and membrane antigen .
The association of EBV replication with the terminally differentiating tongue epithelial cells of OHL is consistent with previous studies of epithelial EBV infection ( 23 ) and suggests that OHL may represent an exaggerated form of the natural epithelial cell infection with EBV .
In this study we have generated a MAb to the key immediate-early protein BZLF1 , which has been shown to disrupt virus latency in B cells ( 12 ) .
This MAb has been fully * Corresponding author .
2868 characterized and used to analyze the pattern of BZLF1 expression in OHL .
We demonstrate , for the first time , the differentiation-associated expression of BZLFI in a biologically relevant cellular environment , i.e .
, human epithelial cells .
MATERIALS AND METHODS Collection of OHL biopsies .
The subjects chosen for tongue biopsies were individuals with symptomatic human immu-nodeficiency virus disease ( CDC IV ) in whom OHL had persisted for at least 3 months .
Subjects were evaluated for the presence of OHL by two physicians before being submitted to tongue biopsy .
Under local anesthetic , an elliptical incisional biopsy ( 2 mm wide by 3 mm long ) was taken from the side of the tongue with OHL .
The tissue sample was snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and subsequently stored at -70°C .
Four of the biopsies analyzed were from British patients , and two biopsies were from American patients .
Generation of MAbs .
A fusion protein containing part of Staphylococcus aureus protein A at its N terminus joined to the full-length BZLF1 sequence ( pREX-BZLF1 ) was used for immunization ( 3 ) .
Hybridomas were generated as previously described ( 19 ) , and culture supernatants were screened for relevant antibodies by using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ) with a different fusion protein ( pEX-BZLF1 ) , containing part of the CII protein of phage A fused to BZLF1 , as the positive target antigen and with phage lambda control protein ( NpeX ) as an irrelevant target antigen ( 17 ) .
The hybridoma cultures that produced apparently BZLF1 specific antibodies in the ELI-SAs were subsequently tested for reactivity on virus-produc-tive and nonproductive cell lines in an indirect immunofluorescence test .
At this stage , hybridomas of interest were recloned by limiting dilution and characterized further by immunoblotting experiments .
In this way an immunoglobu- Vor .
65 , 1991 lin ( Ig ) G1 MAb , designated BZ1 , specific for BZLFI was isolated .
Immunofluorescence and immunohistochemical staining of cells and tissues .
For immunofluorescence , a three-step dou-ble-conjugate indirect method was used .
Methanol-fixed cell spreads or cryostat sections were rehydrated with phos-phate-buffered saline ( PBS ) containing 20 % normal rabbit serum and 10 % EBV-seronegative human serum and incubated with various dilutions of hybridoma culture supernatant for 2 h at 37°C .
Bound MAb was detected by incubation with fluorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) -conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG ( Sigma ) for 1.5 h at 37°C , washing in PBS , and then incubation for 1 h at 37°C with FITC-conjugated rabbit anti-goat IgG ( Sigma ) .
The slides were finally washed in PBS , mounted in DABCO ( 1,4-diazabicyclo [ 2,2,2Joctane ) -based antifading mountant , and visualized by fluorescence microscopy .
For double staining , an indirect immunofluorescence technique was used .
This procedure relied on the different subclass specificities of the primary MAbs and used a mixture of FITC-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgGl and rhodamine-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG2a ( Southern Biotechnology Associates ) as the second step .
Immunohistology was performed by the alkaline phosphatase-anti-alkaline phosphatase ( APAAP ) technique as previously described ( 1 ) .
In situ hybridization .
In situ hybridization was performed as described previously ( 13 ) , using the **S-labeled plasmid pBa-W ( 3.1-kb BamHI-W internal repetitive fragment of EBV strain M-ABA , subcloned in pBR322 ) kindly provided by G. W. Bornkamm , Munich , Germany ( 16 ) .
In brief , frozen sections were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde for 20 min at room temperature ( RT ) , incubated in 0.02 N HCl for 10 min at RT , and then subjected to a proteolytic digestion in 0.125 mg of pronase ( Boehringer , Mannheim , Germany ) per ml for 10 min at RT .
After extensive washing in PBS , 25 pl of hybridization mixture containing 1 ng of the labeled probe was applied to a section .
Cell and probe DNA were denatured together for 2 min at 95°C , and hybridization was carried out overnight at 37°C .
Slides were then washed in 50 % formamide-0.1x SSC ( SSC is 0.15 M NaCl plus 0.015 sodium citrate ) -10 mM dithiothreitol for 4 h , rinsed in 2 % SSC , dehydrated through graded ethanols , dipped in Ilford GS emulsion , exposed at 4°C , developed , and counter-stained .
Double-labeling immunohistology and in situ hybridization .
For the simultaneous detection of EBV DNA and the BZLF1 protein in the same tissue section , frozen sections were fixed sequentially in acetone and chloroform for 30 min each at RT .
Immunohistology was carried out as described above .
After APAAP staining , slides were subjected to in situ hybridization without any additional treatment .
After hybridization overnight and washing as described above , slides were air dried briefly , dipped into Ilford GS emulsion , and exposed for 3 days .
The slides were then developed , counterstained with hematoxylin , and embedded with glycerol gelatin ( Dakopatts , Glostrup , Denmark ) .
SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting .
Protein extracts of appropriate cell lines were analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate ( SDS ) -polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( PAGE ) on 10 % polyacylamide Laemmli gels , blotted onto nitrocellulose filters , probed with specific antibodies , and detected with * `` I-protein A , all as described previously ( 20 ) .
Epitope mapping of the BZLF1-specific MAb .
Various deletion and point mutants of BZLF1 were transcribed and translated in vitro .
The radioactive protein ( labeled with [ > *SJcysteine ) was then immunoprecipitated with the BZLF1 EXPRESSION IN ORAL HAIRY LEUKOPLAKIA 2869 BZLF1-specific MAb BZ1 , and 30 wl of in vitro translation reaction mixture was mixed with 25 wl of BZ1 culture supernatant and 220 pl of ELB ( 250 mM NaCl , 50 mM N-2-hydroxyethylpiperazine-N'-2-ethanesulfonic acid [ HEPES ; pH 7.01 , 5 mM EDTA , 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride , 0.5 mM dithiothreitol , 0.1 % Nonidet P-40 ) at 4°C for 30 min .
Then 12.5 pl of a 1:1 slurry of protein A-Sepharose beads that had been precoated with a rabbit anti-mouse Ig antibody ( Z259 ; Dakopatts ) was added , the solution was mixed for 30 min at 4°C , and the beads were collected by centrifugation and washed three times in ELB .
The bound proteins were eluted in SDS-gel sample buffer and analyzed on a 17.5 % polyacrylamide gel .
The protein A beads were precoated by mixing 200 pl of a 1:1 slurry of beads in ELB with 12 pl 7259 .
After 30 min at 4°C , the beads were washed three times in ELB .
Supershift experiment to demonstrate that the BZLFI-specific MAb recognizes the active dimer of BZLF1I .
Fusion proteins of SmaI-C BZLF1 cloned at the BamHI-EcoRI sites of pGEX and a two-repeat clone of the EBNA-LP ( as a control ) were induced and purified by chromatography on glutathione agarose .
The concentration of each fusion protein was determined by estimating the intensity of the Coomassie-stained gel band on a polyacrylamide gel in comparison with known amounts of bovine serum albumin .
Standard gel retardation reactions were performed as described previously ( 3 ) .
Each reaction mixture contained 6 ng ( =0.5 pmol ) of **P-labeled M 19-mer ( double-stranded GAAGCACTGACTCATGAAG ) , 100 pg of poly ( dI-dC ) per ml , and , where indicated , 0.1 ug ( =1 pmol ) of fusion protein , 1 wl of BZ1 ascites fluid , or 1 wl of PE2 ( a MAb to EBNA2 ; 22 ) ascites fluid .
The fusion protein was allowed to bind to the radioactive DNA for 20 min at RT prior to addition of the appropriate antibody and incubation for a further 20 min .
Controls were incubated for the same length of time .
Complexes were resolved by gel electrophoresis on a 4 % polyacrylamide gel in 0.5 % Tris-borate-EDTA and were detected by autoradiography .
RESULTS Characterization of the BZLFI-specific MAb ( BZ1 ) .
An IgG1 hybridoma ( designated BZ1 ) was isolated which stably produced antibody specifically reactive against productively infected EBV cell lines , as assessed in immunofluorescence staining .
This MAb reacted strongly in immunoblotting with the B95.8 and P3HR1 producer cell lines but not with cell lines in which EBV is latent ( i.e .
, X50-7 and Raji ) ( Fig .
1 ) .
Furthermore , no reactivity was observed in EBV-negative cell lines .
The major protein recognized by BZ1 in B95.8 migrated with an M , of about 39,000 , whereas that observed in the P3HR1 cell line migrated with an M , of approximately 42,000 .
This result is in agreement with previous studies using either polyclonal human sera or a rabbit monospecific antiserum ( 17 , 18 ) .
The specificity of BZl1 was further demonstrated by the reactivity of the MAb with 293 cells transfected with BZLF1 cDNA and not with control transfectants ( Fig .
1 ) .
To map the epitope recognized by BZ1 , we used a range of BZLF1 deletion mutants ( Fig .
2a ) cloned into the transcription vector SP64 .
When linearized and transcribed with SP6 polymerase , RNA was produced which yielded BZLF1l proteins of the expected size when translated in the reticu-locyte lysate ( Fig .
2b ) .
MAb BZ1 was then used in immuno-precipitations of these proteins in vitro translated in the presence of [ *S } cysteine .
Whereas the N-Pstl deletion 2870 YOUNG ET AL .
B95.8 X50-7 P3HR1 Raji BL40 293 + BZ 293 + pUC 116 97 66 45 29 20 FIG .
1 .
Immunoblot showing the reactivity and specificity of MAb BZ1 with BZLF1 protein in productively infected cell lines ( B95.8 and P3HR1 ) and BZLF1 transfectants ( 293 + BZ ) .
No reactivity was observed with EBV-positive latently infected EBV-positive lines ( X50-7 and Raji ) , an EBV-negative line ( BL4O0 ) , or control transfectants ( 293 + pUC ) .
mutant of BZLFI1 failed to be recognized by BZ1 , all of the other deletion mutants were readily detected ( Fig .
2¢ and d ) .
This finding suggested that the epitope recognized by BZ1 resided in the dimerization domain of BZLF1 .
Point muta- a ford b N - Hincll Hindill delta J ; — 46 N 30 8 de /\ 21 14 DNA binding domain Dimerisation domain < -- » 7 ued Lit d Point mutants x BL M c S $ c w C z o 5 < = n » C = a & = a .
5~ 4-4 : 8B © N = w E 2 a I = Ut .
- % 46 .
# # 30 21 14 v4 # % © 7 J. Viror .
tions within the dimerization region did not affect BZ1l recognition .
The M point mutant was immunoprecipitated efficiently in two such experiments ( one illustrated Fig .
2¢ ) , even though its precipitation seems to be reduced in Fig .
2d .
The KL mutant is unable to dimerize under these conditions ( 9 ) , so the reactivity of BZ1 with the dimerization domain of BZLFl and the efficient recognition of these mutants raised the question of whether this MAb would recognize the dimerized , functional form of the protein ( 10 ) or might be reacting only with the inactive , monomeric form .
To examine this point , gel retardation assays were performed using the AP-1 site upstream of BMLF1 as the target and glutathione S-transferase ( GST ) fusion proteins of either BZLF1 ( GST-SmaI-C ) or , as a control , EBNA-LP ( GST-LP ) .
These assays demonstrated specific binding of GST-SmaI-C to the AP-1 site , as shown previously ( Fig .
3 , tracks 7 to 9 ) .
Addition of MAb BZ1 to the gel retardation assay shifted the BZLFI-DNA complex ( track 8 ) , indicating that the MAb was able to recognize the functional active dimerized form of the BZLF1 protein .
No effect was observed with use of a MAb against the EBNA2Z protein ( track 9 ) , and no shift was seen with the GST-LP fusion protein ( tracks 4 to 6 ) .
Reactivity of BZ1 with OHL biopsies .
The OHL biopsy material was initially screened for EBV infection by in situ hybridization to viral DNA and by immunostaining for VCA .
Six biopsies were selected for subsequent analysis .
Serial sections were then analyzed by in situ hybridization and stained with MAb BZ1 and the anti-VCA MAb V3 ( Fig .
4 ) .
In situ hybridization with an EBV-specific probe resulted in & § © 3—D * § wo _ © va € am 3 9 o -o =o # a f § % roos I & « .
g NEL SaM RO - ( 0 % 106 RN - & w w 0 _ £ ( f ve K =r o ¥ 's `` k & 8 o ) $ - =z -Z € a 3 C & 0 .
5 & I* & .
ao Ro .
( 6 .n oe Ao £ w # 00 au.k .d .
Cx cu .
FIG .
2 .
Epitope mapping of MAb BZ1 .
( a ) Diagrammatic representation of the various deletion and point mutations used ; ( b ) in vitro translations without immunoprecipitation ; ( c and d ) two experiments with immunoprecipitation .
Vor .
65 , 1991 FIG .
3 .
Supershift experiment demonstrating that MAb BZ1 recognizes the active dimer of BZLF1 .
The gel retardation reactions were performed as previously described ( 2 ) , using the AP-1 site upstream of BMLF1 as the target .
Tracks : 1 to 3 , reaction mixtures containing no fusion protein ; 4 to 6 , reaction mixtures containing EBNA-LP ( 2R ) fusion protein ; 7 to 9 , reaction mixtures containing BZLF1 Smal-C fusion protein ; 2 , 5 , and 8 , incubated with the MAb BZ1 ; 3 , 6 , and 9 , incubated with the EBNA2-specific MAb , PEZ .
an accumulation of grains over nuclei of the upper layers of the epithelium ( Fig .
4a ) .
This signal was usually very in-tense , leading to saturation of the emulsion even after short exposure times ( 2 to 3 days ) .
Several clusters of positive cells separated by apparently noninfected cells were identified in each specimen , resulting in a focal distribution of EBV replication .
Occasional cells adjacent to foci of viral replication displayed a weaker signal .
No signal was observed over the basal cell layers , and no signal was obtained with unrelated probes ( not shown ) .
The reactivity of both MAb BZ1 and V3 was consistent with this pattern of viral replication .
Immunohistology with BZ1 MAb produced an intense staining of nuclei in the upper layers of OHL epithelium ( Fig .
4b ) .
Interestingly , the stratum corneum demonstrated a markedly reduced level of EBV replication as assessed by all three criteria , i.e .
, in situ hybridization , BZ1 staining , and V3 staining .
To assess the relative association of BZLF1 and VCA expression , double immunofluorescence staining was per-formed .
In these experiments , colocalization of BZLF1 and VCA proteins was observed in certain cell layers ( Fig .
5 ) .
However , a population of cells that were BZLF1 positive but VCA negative were also observed .
These cells were present in the upper spinous layer and generally appeared as a single cell layer immediately preceding VCA expression .
This observation was confirmed in experiments in which sections of OHL were stained with MAb BZ1 and then hybridized for EBV DNA ( Fig .
4¢c and d ) .
This approach permits localization of antigen and viral DNA on a single section .
A layer of BZLF1l-positive cells displaying a weak EBV-specific signal was observed below cell layers in which the strong signal generated by high levels of virus DNA obscured BZ1 staining .
No BZ1 staining was observed lower in the epithelium .
DISCUSSION We have generated a specific MAb , BZ1 , against the BZLF1 protein which reacts in immunohistology , immunoblotting , and immunoprecipitation assays .
Apart from the usefulness of BZ1 in the analysis of BZLF1 expression in cells and tissues , the ability of this reagent to recognize the BZLF1 EXPRESSION IN ORAL HAIRY LEUKOPLAKIA 2871 active , dimeric form of the BZLF1 protein suggests that it will also be important in functional studies .
Epitope mapping experiments localized the region of BZLFl recognized by BZ1 to the dimerization domain .
Supershift assays clearly demonstrated that BZ1 recognized the functional dimerized form of BZLF1 .
However , point mutations which prevent the homodimerization of BZLFI1 did not prevent recognition of the protein by BZ1 , suggesting that the MAb reacts with both the active , dimeric form and the inactive , monomeric form of the protein .
Thus , BZ1 must recognize either ( i ) an epitope within the dimerization domain which does not interfere with the functional dimerization of BZLF1 or ( ii ) an epitope outside of the core dimerization domain .
These possibilities are currently being investigated by using other mutants of BZLF1 .
The reactivity of BZ1 with nuclei of the upper spinous layer of OHL confirms previous studies demonstrating a differentiation-associated pattern of EBV replication in this lesion ( 11 , 23 ) .
The influence of squamous differentiation on BZLF1l expression may be controlled at the BZLF1 promoter level by differentiation-associated regulatory factors .
BZLF1 appears to be expressed prior to rampant virus replication , as assessed either by double staining for BZLF1 and VCA or by in situ hybridization and BZLF1 staining .
Interestingly , the superficial parakeratotic layer appears to have a markedly reduced level of both BZLF1l expression and viral DNA .
This probably results from the reduced availability of viral antigens and DNA in the nuclei of this hyperparakeratotic layer , since other antigens , such as cy-tokeratins , are also less efficiently demonstrated at this site ( 15 ) .
Alternatively , EBV replication may be down-regulated at the terminal stages of epithelial differentiation .
This may have implications for the amount of mature virus shed from OHL .
The replication of EBV in OHL , and by implication probably in normal epithelium , is not typical of herpesvi-ruses .
Replication of herpesviruses is usually accompanied by extensive damage to the affected tissue , e.g .
, ulcers in herpes simplex virus-induced stomatitis or intestinal ulcers caused by cytomegalovirus .
In contrast , EBV replication in the epithelial cells of OHL does not lead to ulceration .
Although some morphological alterations indicative of cytopathic viral effects , e.g .
, koilocytosislike changes and nuclear inclusion bodies , are observed ( 11 ) , virus replication obviously does not lead to cell lysis .
Moreover , the epithelial cells in which EBV is replicating in OHL retain their ability to further differentiate , since dysplasia is usually not observed in this lesion .
Only the presence of parakeratosis indicates a minor impediment in the normal development of a fully mature epithelium .
It seems , therefore , that EBV has evolved to exploit the normal process of epithelial cell differentiation during its replicative cycle , thereby avoiding significant cytopathic effects or associated inflammatory responses .
It has been suggested that the behavior of EBV in OHL resembles that of human papillomavirus infections in which viral latency is maintained in the basal and suprabasal epithelial layers ( 5 , 23 ) .
However , in situ hybridization to EBV DNA in OHL failed to detect viral DNA in the lower layers of the lesion .
This finding is in agreement with previous studies using biotinylated probes ( 2 , 8 ) .
The highly sensitive in situ hybridization technique that we have employed in this study uses *°S-labeled probes and is able to detect the single copy of the EBV genome present in the AW Ramos cell line ( 14 ) .
It may be , therefore , that EBV is not latent in the basal layers of OHL but that the focal areas of 2872 YOUNG ET AL .
J. Viror .
Vor .
65 , 1991 BZLF1 EXPRESSION IN ORAL HAIRY LEUKOPLAKIA 2873 FIG .
4 .
( a ) Demonstration of EBV DNA in an OHL by in situ hybridization using a **S-labeled DNA probe ( 3 days of exposure ; hematoxylin and eosin counterstaining ; X200 ) .
( b ) Adjacent section of the same sample stained with MAb BZ1 ( APAAP technique ; hematoxylin counterstaining ; X200 ) .
( c and d ) Double-labeling immunohistology and in situ hybridization of an OHL biopsy showing a layer of BZLF1-positive cells underneath a focus of viral replication ( c ; 3 days of exposure ; hematoxylin counterstaining ; X100 ) , which display a weak EBV-specific signal ( d ; x400 ) .
FIG .
5 .
Double immunofluorescence staining of an OHL section for VCA ( a ; X200 ) and BZLF1 ( b ; X200 ) , revealing a layer of BZLF1l-positive but VCA-negative cells ( arrows ) .
2874 YOUNG ET AL .
EBV replication represent regions of self-sustained reinfec-tion .
If this is the case , our ideas concerning the persistence of EBV in the epithelial compartment may have to be revised .
Indeed , other recent reports have questioned the role of epithelium as the permanent reservoir of EBV infection ( 6 , 13 , 21 ) .
Further studies examining the pattern of EBV latent gene expression in OHL may help resolve this issue .
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the Cancer Research Campaign , London , United Kingdom , and by NIH grant PO1 DEO7946 .
Support for G.N .
was provided by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-schaft .
We are indebted to J. R. Harris and A. J. Pinching for access to their patients , to M. Birchall for collecting biopsies , and to H. Stein ( Berlin , Germany ) for kindly providing the APAAP complex .
REFERENCES 1 .
Cordell , J. L. , B. Falini , W. N. Erber , A. K. Ghosh , Z. Abdulaziz , S. MacDonald , K. A. F. Pulford , H. Stein , and D. Y. Mason .
1984 .
Immunoenzymatic labelling of monoclonal antibodies using immune complexes of alkaline phosphatase and monoclonal anti-alkaline phosphatase ( APAAP complexes ) .
J. Histochem .
Cytochem .
32:219-229 .
2 .
De Souza , Y. G. , D. Greenspan , J. R. Felton , G. A. Hartzog , M. Hammer , and J. S. Greenspan .
1989 .
Localization of Epstein-Barr virus DNA in the epithelial cells of oral hairy leukoplakia by in situ hybridization on tissue sections .
N. Engl .
J. Med .
320:1559-1560 .
3 .
Farrell , P. J. , D. T. Rowe , C. M. Rooney , and T. Kouzarides .
1989 .
Epstein Barr virus BZLF1l transactivator specifically binds to a consensus AP-1 site and is related to c-fos .
EMBO J .
8:127-132 .
4 .
Friedman-Kien , A. E. 1986 .
Viral origin of hairy leukoplakia .
Lancet i1:694-695 .
5 .
Gilligan , K. , P. Rajadurai , L. Resnick , and N. Raab-Traub .
1990 .
Epstein-Barr virus small nuclear RNAs are not expressed in permissively infected cells in AIDS-associated leukoplakia .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA $ 7:8790-8794 .
6 .
Gratama , J. W. , M. A. P. Osterveer , F. E. Zwann , J. Lepoutre , G. Klein , and I. Ernberg .
1988 .
Eradication of Epstein Barr virus by allogeneic bone marrow transplantation : implications for sites of viral latency .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 85:8693-8696 .
7 .
Greenspan , D. , J. S. Greenspan , M. Conart , V. Petersen , S. Silverman , and Y. de Souza .
1984 .
Oral `` hairy `` leukoplakia in male homosexuals : evidence of association with both papillomavirus and a herpes-group virus .
Lancet ii:831-834 .
8 .
Greenspan , J. S. , D. Greenspan , E. Lennette , D. I. Abrams , M. A. Conart , V. Petersen , and U. K. Freese .
1985 .
Replication of Epstein-Barr virus within the epithelial cells of oral `` hairy `` leukoplakia , an AIDS-associated lesion .
N. Engl .
J. Med .
10 .
11 .
12 .
13 .
14 .
15 .
16 .
17 .
18 .
19 .
20 .
21 .
22 .
23 .
J. Viror .
313:1564-1571. .
Kouzarides , T. , G. Packham , A. Cook , and P. J. Farrell .
1991 .
The BZLF1 protein of Epstein-Barr virus has a coiled-coil dimerisation domain without a heptad leucine repeat but with homology to the C/EBP leucine zipper .
Oncogene 6:195-204 .
Lieberman , P. M. , and A. J. Berk .
1990 .
In vitro transcriptional activation , dimerization , and DNA-binding specificity of the Epstein-Barr virus Zta protein .
J. Virol .
64:2560-2568 .
Loning , T. , R. P. Henke , R. Reichart , and J. Becker .
1987 .
In situ hybridisation to detect Epstein Barr virus DNA in oral tissues of HIV-infected patients .
Virchows Archiv .
A 412:127-133 .
Miller , G. 1990 .
The switch between latency and replication of Epstein Barr virus .
J. Infect .
Dis .
161:833-844 .
Niedobitek , G. , S. Hamilton-Dutoit , H. Herbst , T. Finn , M. Vetner , G. Pallesen , and H. Stein .
1989 .
Identification of Epstein Barr virus-infected cells in tonsils of acute infectious mononucleosis by in situ hybridisation .
Hum .
Pathol .
20:796-799 .
Niedobitek , G. , and H. Herbst .
Applications of in situ hybridization .
Int .
Rev .
Exp .
Pathol .
, in press .
Niedobitek , G. , R. Lau , and L. S. Young .
Unpublished data .
Polack , A. , G. Harti , U. Zimber , U. K. Freese , G. Laux , K. Takaki , B. Hohn , L. Gissmann , and G. Bornkamm .
1984 .
A complete set of overlapping cosmid clones of M-ABA virus derived from nasopharyngeal carcinoma and its similarity to other Epstein Barr virus isolates .
Gene 27:279-288 .
Rooney , C. M. , D. T. Rowe , T. Ragot , and P. J. Farrell .
1989 .
The spliced BZLF1 gene of Epstein-Barr virus ( EBV ) transac-tivates an early EBV promoter and induces the virus productive cycle .
J. Virol .
63:3109-3116 .
Rooney , C. M. , N. Taylor , J. Countryman , H. Jenson , J. Kolman , and G. Miller .
1988 .
Genome rearrangements activate the Epstein Barr virus gene whose product disrupts latency .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 85:9801-9805 .
Rowe , M. , H. S. Evans , L. S. Young , K. Hennessy , E. Kieff , and A .
B. Rickinson .
1987 .
Monoclonal antibodies to the latent membrane protein of Epstein Barr virus reveal heterogeneity of the protein and inducible expression in virus-transformed cells .
J. Gen. Virol .
68:1575-1586 .
Rowe , M. , L. S. Young , K. Cadwallader , L. Petti , E. Kieff , and A .
B. Rickinson .
1989 .
Distinction between Epstein-Barr virus type A ( EBNA 2A ) and type B ( EBNA 2B ) isolates extends to the EBNA 3 family of nuclear proteins .
J. Virol .
63:1031-1039 .
Yao , Q.-Y .
, P. Ogan , M. Rowe , M. Wood , and A .
B. Rickinson .
1989 .
Epstein Barr virus-infected B cells persist in the circulation of acyclovir-treated virus carriers .
Int .
J .
Cancer 43:67-71 .
Young , L. S. , C. Alfieri , K. Hennessy , H. Evans , C. O'Hara , C. Anderson , J. Ritz , R. S. Shapiro , A .
B. Rickinson , E. Kieff , and J. I. Cohen .
1989 .
Expression of Epstein-Barr virus transformation associated genes in tissues from patients with EBV lym-phoproliferative disease .
N. Engl .
J. Med .
321:1080-1085 .
Young , L. S. , and J. W. Sixbey .
1988 .
Epstein Barr virus and epithelial cells : a possible role for the virus in the development of cervical carcinoma .
Cancer Surv .
7:507-518 .
