The EMBO Journal vol.10 no.8 pp.2247- 2258 , 1991 Reactive oxygen intermediates as apparently widely used messengers in the activation of the NF-xB transcription factor and HIV-1 Ralf Schreck , Peter Rieber ' and Patrick A.Baeuerle* Laboratorium fiir Molekulare Biologie der Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitit Miinchen , Genzentrum , Am Klopferspitz 18a , D-8033 Martinsried and 'Institut fiir Immunologie , Goethestrasse 31 , D-8000 Miinchen 2 , FRG Corresponding author Communicated by I. W. Mattaj Hydrogen peroxide and oxygen radicals are agents commonly produced during inflammatory processes .
In this study , we show that micromolar concentrations of H ; ,0 ; , can induce the expression and replication of HIV-1 in a human T cell line .
The effect is mediated by the NF-xB transcription factor which is potently and rapidly activated by an H , O ; treatment of cells from its inactive cytoplasmic form .
N-acetyl-L-cysteine ( NAC ) , a well characterized antioxidant which counteracts the effects of reactive oxygen intermediates ( RON ) in living cells , prevented the activation of NF-xB by H ; 0 , .
NAC and other thiol compounds also blocked the activation of NF-xB by cycloheximide , double-stranded RNA , calcium ionophore , TNF- « , active phorbol ester , interleukin-1 , lipopolysaccharide and lectin .
This suggests that diverse agents thought to activate NF-xB by distinct intracellular pathways might all act through a common mechanism involving the synthesis of ROI .
ROI appear to serve as messengers mediating directly or indirectly the release of the inhibitory subunit IxB from NF-xB .
Key words : N-acetyl-L-cysteine/activation of NF-xB/ HIV-1/hydrogen peroxide/NF-xB Introduction NF-xB is a multisubunit transcription factor that can rapidly activate the expression of genes involved in inflammatory , immune and acute phase responses ( for reviews see Baeuerle and Baltimore , 1991 ; Baeuerle , 1991 ) .
The protein is found in many different cell types and tissues but has been characterized best in cells of the immune system such as pre-B , B and T lymphocytes , macrophages and monocytes .
Many target genes of the ubiquitous NF-xB show a tissue-or cell type-specific expression which might come from a synergistic action of NF-xB with cell type-specific factors within enhancers and promoters .
Most of the target genes fall into three classes : genes encoding ( i ) immunomodulatory cytokines such as IL-6 , 3-interferon and GM-CSF , ( ii ) immunoregulatory cell surface receptors such as MHC class I antigens , non-polymorphic subunits of MHC genes and the IL-2 cytokine receptor , and ( iii ) acute phase proteins such as serum amyloid A precursor and angiotensinogen .
In most cells , NF-xB is present in a non-DNA-binding form in the cytoplasm ( Baeuerle and Baltimore , 1988a , b ) .
This complex is composed of three subunits : a DNA-binding © Oxford University Press 48-55 kd protein ( p50 ) ( Kawakami et al .
, 1988 ; Kieran et al .
, 1990 ; Ghosh et al .
, 1990 ) , a DNA-binding 65-68 kd protein ( p65 ) ( Baeuerle and Baltimore , 1989 ; Ruben et al .
, 1991 ; Urban et al .
, 1991 ) and a third inhibitory subunit , called IxB , which is bound to p65 ( Baeuerle and Baltimore , 1988b ; Urban and Baeuerle , 1990 ; Urban et al .
, 1991 ) .
IxB inhibits DNA-binding of NF-xB and appears to be responsible for the cytoplasmic localization of the complex ( Baeuerle and Baltimore , 1988b ) .
It is apparently the release of IxB which triggers the activation of the NF-xB transcription factor .
Recent molecular cloning of the p50 ( Bours er al .
, 1990 ; Ghosh et al .
, 1990 ; Kieran et al .
, 1990 ) and p65 subunits ( Ruben eral .
, 1990 ) revealed that their DNA-binding/dimerization domains share high homology with that of the rel proto-oncogene proteins .
There is at least one more c-rel/NF-xB-like protein with a molecular size of 75 kd ( p75 ) ( Ballard et al .
, 1990 ) .
p50 can associate with c-rel and p75 after a combined renaturation in vitro but it is unclear yet whether this can occur in vivo as well .
A characteristic of NF-xB is that many different agents can induce its DNA-binding activity ( reviewed in Baeuerle and Baltimore , 1991 ; Baeuerle , 1991 ) .
Among them are viruses ( which can activate NF-xB either by the action of viral transactivator proteins or double-stranded RNA intermediates ) , bacterial lipopolysaccharide , protein synthesis inhibitors , the cytokines TNF-a , TNF- and interleukin-1 , and T cell mitogens , such as phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate ( PMA ) , lectins , calcium ionophores and antibodies directed against T cell receptors .
Very little is known of how such diverse agents can all cause the same reaction , i.e .
, the release of IxB from p50-p65 in the cytoplasm .
Some progress was recently made in understanding the activation of NF-xB by PMA , an activator of protein kinase C ( PKC ) .
The reaction of PKC with cytoplasm ( Shirakawa and Mizel , 1989 ) or partially purified NF-xB-IxB complex ( Ghosh and Baltimore , 1990 ) under kinasing conditions caused an activation of the DNA-binding of NF-xB .
Furthermore , treatment of purified IxB with PKC inactivated the inhibitor and the incorporation of radioactive phosphate into a protein of the molecular size of IxB was observed ( Ghosh and Baltimore , 1990 ) .
This suggested that a direct phosphorylation of IxB through PKC released the inhibitor and thereby activated NF-xB .
On the other hand , activation of NF-xB by TNF- « appears to be independent of PKC ( Meichle et al .
, 1990 ) .
Although TNF induces a rapid and transient activation of PKC ( Schiitze et al .
, 1990 ) , depletion of the kinase by chronic PMA treatment and the use of PKC inhibitors did not affect NF-xB activation by TNF .
Also the NF-xB activation by protein synthesis inhibitors ( Sen and Baltimore , 1986 ) and double-stranded RNA ( Visvanathan and Goodbourn , 1989 ; Lenardo et al .
, 1989 ) are unlikely to be mediated by PKC .
Very recently , Roederer et al .
( 1990 ) reported that N-acetyl-L-cysteine ( NAC ) is a potent inhibitor of the PMA 2247 R.Schreck , P.Rieber and P.A.Baeuerle and TNF- & -induced activation of the HIV-1 LTR .
While our study was in progress , a second study from the Herzenberg laboratory ( Staal et al .
, 1990 ) showed that NAC blocked specifically the activation of NF-xB .
The authors suggested that the intracellular glutathione ( GSH ) level , which is increased by NAC , is an important regulator of the activity of NF-xB .
Because GSH levels control the concentration of ROI within cells via the GSH peroxidase ( for review , see Halliwell and Gutteridge , 1990 ) , we were prompted to test the possibility that oxygen radicals are involved in the activation of NF-xB in the cytoplasm .
We used H ; O ; as a membrane-permeable reagent which allows studies of the effects of oxygen radicals in living cells .
Moreover , H , O ; is physiologically produced in large amounts by granulocytes and macrophages during inflammatory processes and is implicated , together with oxygen radicals , in many pathological situations ( for reviews see Cerutti , 1985 ; Blake et al .
, 1987 ; Halliwell and Gutteridge , 1989 , 1990 ) .
In this study , we report on the activation of NF-xB by treatment of Jurkat T cells with micromolar amounts of hydrogen peroxide .
The same treatment could also potently transactivate the enhancer/promoter in the HIV-1 LTR depending on intact binding sites for NF-xB , and increase the production of new HIV-1 virus in latently infected T cells .
The antioxidant and radical scavenger NAC inhibited the activation of NF-xB by H ; O ; , strongly supporting the idea that oxygen radicals were involved in the activation process .
We also found that the activation of NF-xB by cycloheximide , double-stranded RNA , interleukin-1 ( IL-1 ) , bacterial lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) , calcium ionophore , lectin and , as reported earlier ( Staal et al .
, 1990 ) , by TNF-a and PMA , was strongly inhibited by NAC .
Also other thiol compounds blocked the activation of NF-xB and the effect was not restricted to T cells .
These findings could provide a unifying concept of how many different agents can induce the DNA-binding of the cytoplasmic form of NF-xB : ROI , which can transiently increase in cells by different mechanisms , could serve as messengers that directly or indirectly cause the release of IxB from the p50-p65-IxB complex .
Results Treatment of T cells with H , O ; activates NF-xB Jurkat T cells are widely used in the study of T cell activation processes and provide a model system for studying the induction of HIV-1 gene expression in latently infected cells ( Nabel and Baltimore , 1987 ; Osborn et al .
, 1989 ) .
The human T lymphoma cell line responds-to treatments with the active phorbol ester PMA , lectins and TNF with the activation of NF-xB and NF-xB-controlled genes .
Here we have tested hydrogen peroxide , an agent produced during inflammatory processes ( for review see Halliwell and Gutteridge , 1989 ) , for its capability to activate NF-xB .
Because H , O ; can permeate the plasma membrane and can be converted intracellularly into more reactive oxygen intermediates , it allows investigation of the effects of H , O ; and of oxygen radicals in living cells .
Jurkat T cells were incubated in the presence of 150 4M H , O ; ( Figure 1A ) .
After various times , aliquots of the cell culture were harvested and cells fractionated into cytosol and nuclei .
Nuclear salt extracts and cytosol were then prepared and analyzed for the specific DNA-binding of NF-xB using 2248 Fig .
1 .
The effect of an H ; O ; treatment on DNA-binding activities in Jurkat T cells .
( A ) Rapid induction of a x enhancer-binding protein by treatment of T cells with H ; O ; .
Jurkat T cells were left untreated ( Co , lanes 2 and 8 ) or incubated for various times with 150 « M H ; , O ; , .
Nuclear extracts ( lanes 2-7 ) and cytosolic fractions ( lanes 8-13 ) were prepared and equal proportions ( 2-8 ug of protein ) reacted with a P-labeled DNA probe encompassing the xB motif of the mouse x light chain enhancer ( Sen and Baltimore , 1986 ) .
A protein-DNA complex with purified NF-xB composed of pSO and p65 subunits ( Bacuerle and Baltimore , 1989 ) was electrophoresed in lane 1 .
Samples were analyzed on a native 4 % polyacrylamide gel .
A fluorogram of the gel is shown .
The filled arrowhead indicates the position of a NF-xB-DNA complex and the open arrowhead the position of unbound DNA .
( B ) Dose dependence and the effect of long-term incubation by H ; O ; .
Jurkat T cells were incubated for 4 and 16 h with either 30 , 50 or 100 4M H ; O ; .
The radioactivity in the induced protein-DNA complex co-migrating with that of NF-xB was determined by Cerenkov counting and the numbers corrected for the same amount of protein .
electrophoretic mobility shift assays ( EMSAs ) .
As shown in Figure 1A ( lanes 2-7 ) , H , O , rapidly activated an activity that retarded in native gels a *°P-labeled DNA Fig .
2 .
Characterization of the H , O ; -induced DNA-binding activity .
( A ) Binding competition analysis .
A nuclear extract from H , O ; -treated ( 100 aM ; 3 h ) Jurkat cells was used .
2.5- , 25- and 250-fold molar excesses of unlabeled competitor olifonucleotides ( described in Zabel et al .
, 1991 ) were mixed with the `` P-labeled x enhancer probe and the binding reaction started by the addition of the nuclear extract .
The competitor oligonucleotide encompassed the NF-xB binding site from the interleukin 2 receptor & chain promoter , 'IL-2R mu ' is the same oligonucleotide with two point mutations ( see text ) , and 'unr ' is an unrelated DNA fragment described in Urban and Baeuerle ( 1990 ) .
A fluorogram of a native gel is shown .
The filled arrowhead indicates the position of the xB-specific DNA-binding activity and arrows the positions of two non-specific ( n.s . )
activities .
The open arrowhead shows the position of unbound DNA .
( B ) Immunoreactivity of the H ; O ; -inducible protein-DNA complex .
Purified human NF-xB ( Zabel et al .
, 1991 ) ( lanes 1 , 3 , 5 and 7 ) and a nuclear extract from Jurkat cells treated with 50 # M H , O , for 1 h ( lanes 2 , 4 , 6 and 8 ) were reacted with a mix of pre-immune sera ( lanes 3 and 4 ) , an antiserum specific for the p50 subunit of NF-xB ( no .
2 ; Kieran er a/ .
, 1990 ) ( lanes 5 and 6 ) or an antiserum reacting with the unique C-terminus of the human c-rel protein ( Brownell er a/ .
, 1988 ) ( lanes 7 and 8 ) .
After immunoreaction , the DNA probe was added together with a DNA-binding mix and samples were electrophoresed on a native gel .
A fluorogram of a native gel is shown .
Lanes 9-11 show a slowly migrating binding activity from the serum labeled with an arrow ( S ) .
Lane 12 shows the DNA-binding mix without additions .
A bracket on the left indicates the position of immune-complexed NF-xB .
( C ) The effect of cycloheximide ( CHX ) on the induction of NF-xB by H ; , O ; .
Jurkat T cells were left untreated ( lane 2 ) or incubated with 10 ug/ml ( lane 3 ) , 50 ug/ml cycloheximide ( lane 4 ) and 50 1M H ; O ; , ( lane 5 ) .
Lanes 6 and 7 show a combined treatment of 50 1M H ; O ; , with 10 and 50 ug/ml CHX , respectively .
The protein-DNA complex of purifed NF-xB was electrophoresed in lane 1 .
A fluorogram of a native gel is shown .
probe encompassing the decameric NF-xB motif from the mouse x light chain enhancer .
The newly activated protein-DNA complex co-migrated with that formed by purified human NF-xB composed of p50 and p65 protein subunits ( Figure 1A , lane 1 ) .
More conclusive evidence for the H ; , O , -activated factor being NF-xB came from a binding competition analysis and an immunoreactivity experiment shown below ( see Figure 2 ) .
Activation of NF-xB by oxidant stress In cytosolic fractions , no accumulation of the H , O ; -activated protein-DNA complex was seen ( Figure 1B , lanes 9-13 ) indicating that the newly activated NF-xB was rapidly translocated from the cytoplasm into the nucleus .
None of the faster migrating factors binding to the x enhancer probe was affected by the H ; , O ; -treatment of cells indicating that the activation was specific for NF-xB and did not reduce the DNA-binding of other proteins ( see also Figure 3 ) .
Also concentrations < 150 uM H , O ; could efficiently activate NF-xB ( Figure 1B ) .
A kinetic analysis showed that a treatment of cells with 30 LM H , O , accumulated significant amounts of active NF-xB in nuclei .
With 25 4M H ; 0 ; , no significant activation was seen after 4 h ( data not shown ) .
However , we observed some variation between experiments with respect to the minimal concentration of H , O ; that induced NF-xB activity .
This could be due to different extents of decomposition of H , O , in the cell culture medium catalyzed by either serum components ( Link and Riley , 1988 ) or enzymes released from cells .
In the presence of 50 and 100 LM H ; 0 ; , , more NF-xB was activated after 4 h than with 30 gM .
After 16 h of incubation , a slight reduction in the amount of active nuclear NF-xB was seen ( Figure 1B ) .
There was only a small difference between the activation potential of 50 and 100 4M H ; , O0 ; , suggesting that a maximal stimulation of NF-xB was reached between 50 and 100 aM .
Prolonged treatment of cells with H , O ; concentrations > 150 uM significantly decreased the survival of Jurkat T cells .
This was observed with other cell lines too ( Link and Riley , 1988 ) .
H , O ; could also activate NF-xB in various other cell lines tested , among them the mouse fibroblast line Ltk~ ( see Table I ) and the pre-B cell line 702/3 ( data not shown ) .
The possible identity of the H ; O ; -activated DNA-binding protein with NF-xB was further investigated by a binding competition analysis ( Figure 2A ) and by the use of antisera specific for the DNA-binding p50 subunit of NF-xB ( Figure 2B ) .
Nuclear extracts from cells treated with 100 uM H , O ; were reacted with a P-labeled x enhancer probe in the absence ( Figure 2A , lane 1 ) or presence of increasing amounts of various unlabeled competitor oligonucleotides ( lanes 2-10 ) .
Competition with a 250-fold molar excess of an oligonucleotide encompassing the NF-xB binding motif 5-GGGAATCTCC-3 ' from the IL-2R promoter completely eliminated the formation of the radioactive protein-DNA complex induced by H ; O ; treatment ( Figure 2A , lane 4 ) .
At a 250-fold molar excess , the competition with increasing amounts of a mutant xB motif from the interleukin 2 receptor gene promoter ( 5'-GGGAATCTAA-3 `` ) showed only a weak effect on binding ( Figure 2A , lane 7 ) .
A DNA fragment which does not contain sequences similar to xB motifs showed no competition within the concentration range tested ( lanes 8-10 ) .
These results demonstrate the xB-specific DNA-binding of the H , O ; -activated factor .
The binding of the two minor activities to the radioactive DNA probe was not strongly influenced by any of the competitor oligonucleotides demonstrating that their DNA-binding was not sequence-specific .
These activities must have been endogenous because they were not detectable in a reaction without nuclear extract ( Figure 2B , lane 12 ) .
Next , we tested whether the H , O ; , -activated protein-DNA complex could react with an antiserum raised against the DNA-binding p50 subunit of NF-xB ( Kieran et al .
, 1990 ) .
The serum did not cross-react with the related 2249 R.Schreck , P.Rieber and P.A.Baeuerle c-rel protein in EMSAs ( U.Zabel and P.Baeuerle , unpublished ) .
The presence of anti-p50 serum during the DNA-binding reaction abolished the protein-DNA complex of purified NF-xB ( Figure 2B , compare lanes 1 and 5 ) .
Also , the co-migrating inducible complex from a nuclear extract of H , O ; -treated Jurkat cells was abolished by the antiserum ( Figure 2B , compare lanes 2 and 6 ) .
The pre-immune serum had no effect on the protein-DNA complex of NF-xB ( Figure 2B , lanes 3 and 4 ) .
c-rel is another protein which can recognize xB sequence motifs ( Kieran et al .
, 1990 ; Ballard et al .
, 1990 ) and shares high homology with p50 NF-xB within a 300 amino acid long DNA-binding and dimerization domain ( Bours et al .
, 1990 ; Kieran et al .
, 1990 ; Ghosh et al .
, 1990 ) .
An antiserum raised against the unique C-terminus of the human c-rel protein ( Brownell et al .
, 1988 ) did not react with the purified NF-xB and H ; , O ; -activated factor ( Figure 2B , lanes 7 and 8 ) .
All three sera contained a factor which gave rise to a very slowly migrating protein-DNA complex in EMSAs ( Figure 2B , lanes 3-11 ) and was present in different amounts in the sera ( lanes 9-11 ) .
A characteristic of NF-xB is its activation by a post-translational mechanism involving the release of the inhibitory subunit IxB from a latent cytoplasmic form ( Baeuerle and Baltimore , 1988a , b ; for a review see Bacuerle , 1991 ) .
In order to investigate whether the activation of NF-xB by H , O , was a post-translational event , we performed the treatment with H , O ; in the presence of the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide ( Figure 2C ) .
If Jurkat T cells were treated with 10 or 50 ug/ml cycloheximide alone , a weak activation of NF-xB was seen ( Figure 2C , compare lane 2 with lanes 3 and 4 ) .
A treatment with 50 uM H , O ; for 2 h was chosen to obtain only a sub-optimal activation of NF-xB ( Figure 2C , lane 5 ) .
In the presence of 10 ug/ml cycloheximide , the H , O ; treatment could further increase the amount of nuclear NF-xB ( Figure 2C , lane 6 ) .
As determined by Cerenkov counting of the protein-DNA complexes , the effects of the protein synthesis inhibitor and H ; O ; were additive .
In a combined treatment with 50 ug/ml cycloheximide and 50 « M H ; O ; , , a slight superinduction was observed ( Figure 2C , lane 7 ) .
These results show that the activation of NF-xB by H , O , occurred post-translationally .
The activation of NF-xB by oxidant stress is specific We tested whether treatment of cells with H , O ; influences the DNA-binding activity of other inducible and constitutive transcription factors ( Figure 3A ) .
The nuclear extracts from control and H ; O ; -treated cells were incubated with P-labeled DNA probes which allow detection of the DNA-binding activities of NF-xB , AP-l/c-fos proteins , glucocorticoid receptor and various octamer-binding proteins ( for a review , see Johnson and McKnight , 1989 ) .
The specificity of protein-DNA complexes was tested by competition with the respective unlabeled oligonucleotide .
An induction of a DNA-binding activity was only seen with the xB probe ( Figure 3A , first panel ) .
H , O ; did not induce activities binding to the AP-1 probe or a glucocorticoid response element ( Figure 3A , panels 2 and 3 ) .
The constitutive DNA-binding activities of the ubiquitous oct-1 and faster-migrating lymphoid-specific oct-2 proteins were unchanged after treatment of cells with H , O , ( Figure 3A , last panel ) .
In conclusion , the treatment of Jurkat cells with 2250 nd bd bt bt tnd Fig .
3 .
The specificity of the H , O ; effect .
( A ) The effect of an H , O , treatment on the DNA-binding activity of other inducible and constitutive transcription factors .
Nuclear extracts from control ( lanes 1 , 4 , 7 and 10 ) and H , O ; treated Jurkat cells ( 100 uM ; 3 h ) were reacted with *P-labeled DNA probes detecting NF-xB ( xB ; lanes 1-3 ) , jun/c-fos proteins ( AP-1 ; lanes 4-5 ) , the glucocorticoid receptor ( GR ; lanes 7-9 ) and octamer-binding proteins ( oct ; lanes 10-12 ) .
In lanes 3 , 6 , 9 and 12 , a 100-fold molar excess of the respective unlabeled specific oligonucleotide was added as competitor .
Samples were analyzed by EMSA .
Fluorograms of native gels are shown .
Filled arrowheads indicate the positions of presumably specific protein-DNA complexes .
The open arrowhead shows the position of the unbound DNA probes .
( B ) The effects of heat shock and chemical stress factors on the activity of NF-xB .
Jurkat cells were treated for 1 h at 42°C ( HS ; lane 2 ) or for 4 h with 50 4M cadmium sulfate ( Cd ; lane 3 ) , 50 gM sodium arsenite ( Ars ; lane 4 ) and 50 4M H ; O ; ( lane 5 ) .
Lane 1 shows control cells .
Nuclear extracts were analyzed by EMSA using a labeled x enhancer probe .
A fluorogram of a native gel is shown .
The filled arrowhead indicates the position of the NF-xB-DNA complex and the open arrowhead the position of unbound DNA probe .
H , O , appears to activate specifically the NF-xB transcription factor .
Various DNA-binding activities detected with other DNA probes are either unchanged or show a slight decrease in activity which might be indicative of some oxidative damage .
Besides oxidant stress , also heat shock and chemical inducers of the cellular stress response can induce the expression of genes ( Ashburner and Bonner , 1979 ; Ananthan et al .
, 1986 ; Zimarino and Wu , 1987 ; Ciavarra and Simeone , 1990 ) .
We therefore investigated whether exposure of Jurkat cells to heat shock ( Figure 3B , lane 2 ) , cadmium sulfate ( lane 3 ) and sodium arsenite ( lane 4 ) under previously reported conditions ( Geelen et al .
, 1988 ) and for the same duration as the H , O , treatment ( 1-4 h ) can activate NF-xB .
None of the treatments caused a rapid appearance of detectable amounts of NF-xB binding activity in nuclear extracts from Jurkat T cells ( Figure 3B ) .
This suggests that NF-xB is a transcription factor which is specifically activated if T cells are exposed to oxidant stress .
Low concentrations of H , O ; induce expression of HIV-1 In Jurkat T cells , NF-xB binding sites in promoters and enhancers of genes serve as response elements that confer activation of genes following treatment with TNF-a ( Osborn et al .
, 1989 ; Lowenthal et al .
, 1989 ) , TNF-8 ( Messer et al .
, 1990 ; Paul et al .
, 1990 ) , PMA and lectins ( Tong-Starksen et al .
, 1989 ; Nabel and Baltimore , 1987 ) .
In the following experiments , we have tested whether the NF-xB binding sites in the HIV-1 LTR can also serve as response elements for H ; ,0 ; , , an agent produced during inflammatory processes by granulocytes and macrophages ( Figure 4A and B ) .
A reporter gene construct with the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase ( CAT ) gene under the control of the HIV-1 enhancer/ promoter was transfected into Jurkat T cells .
Cells were then treated for 20 h with either a combination of PMA and the lectin phytohemagglutinin ( PHA ) , 10-50 LM H ; O ; , , or with human TNF-a .
Thereafter , cells were lysed and extracts assayed for the activity of the reporter gene product , the CAT enzyme .
H , O ; caused a strong induction of CAT enzyme activity as was evident from the increased acetylation of chloramphenicol compared with control cells ( Figure 4A and B ) .
While 10 uM H ; 0 , were ineffective , 30 uM gave a maximal induction which was not further augmented by treatment with 50 4M H ; O ; .
The 11-fold increase in CAT activity after treatment with 30 aM H ; O ; , was as strong as that obtained with PMA/PHA treatment and even higher than that seen after treatment with TNF-a ( seven-fold induction ) ( Figure 4B ) .
In order to test whether the NF-xB-binding sites in the HIV-1 LTR are responsible for the H ; , O ; , -inducible CAT gene expression , a construct was used in which the two xB motifs were mutated such that binding of NF-xB is abolished ( Nabel and Baltimore , 1987 , 1990 ) .
This xB mutant construct of the HIV-1 LTR showed no induction of CAT activity upon treatment of cells with H , O ; , PMA/PHA or TNF- « .
The dependence of the gene inducibility of the HIV-1 LTR by a TNF-a and PMA/PHA treatment on intact NF-xB-binding sites is consistent with earlier data ( Nabel and Baltimore , 1987 ; Osborn et al .
, 1989 ; Duh ert al .
, 1989 ) .
Since the increase in CAT enzyme activity after H , O ; treatment of cells was completely dependent on the NF-xB elements in the HIV-1 enhancer , it is very unlikely that H , O , increased the stability of the CAT mRNA , induced an endogenous acetylation activity or stimulated the basal CAT enzyme activity .
Rather , the data show that « M-concentrations of H , O ; can potently activate HIV-1 LTR-controlled gene expression depending on the two NF-xB binding motifs in the LTR .
Activation of NF-xB by oxidant stress Fig .
4 .
The effect of an H , O , treatment in Jurkat cells on the expression of HIV-1 T cells .
( A ) The effect of H , O , on the HIV-1 LTR-controlled expression of a CAT reporter gene in Jurkat cells .
Cells were transfected with a CAT reporter gene construct controlled by the promoter/enhancer of HIV-1 ( HIV-LTR wt ) or a construct with mutations altering the two NF-xB-binding sites in the LTR ( HIV-LTR xB mu ) ( Nabel and Baltimore , 1987 , 1990 ) .
In the last position , the effect of a mock transfection is shown .
Cells transfected by the DEAE -dextran method were left untreated ( Co ) or incubated for 20 h with the phorbol ester PMA in combination with the lectin phytohemagluttinin ( PHA ) , 10 , 30 or 50 1M H ; O ; , or recombinant human TNF- .
The acetylated forms of [ '*C ) chloramphenicol ( Ac ) were separated from unreacted reagent ( Non-Ac ) by ascending thin layer chromatography .
An autoradiogram is shown .
( B ) Quantification of the CAT activity by liquid scintillation counting .
Bars indicate the -fold stimulation of CAT activity in comparison with untreated cells ( Co ; set to 1.0 ) .
Results from two independent experiments are shown as average values .
( C ) The effect of H , O ; on the production of HIV-1 in latently infected Jurkat cells .
Jurkat T cells were inoculated with an HIV-1 isolate and cultured for 8 days .
Washed cells were then incubated for 24 h with 50 +M H ; ,0 ; , .
50 ng/ml PMA or left untreated ( Co ) followed by determination of the viral p24 protein in culture supernatants by ELISA and the induction of syncytia by a titration assay ( SIA ) .
2251 R.Schreck , P.Rieber and P.A.Baeuerle We next tested whether treatment with H , O ; can activate HIV-1 replication in latently HIV-1 infected Jurkat T cells .
Infected cells were treated with either 50 gM H ; O ; , 50 ng/ml PMA or left untreated .
Twenty-four hours later , the production of the p24 protein was determined by ELISA and the formation of syncytia was determined in a titration assay using C8166 cells .
Untreated cells exhibited a basal level of p24 production and their cell culture supernatants caused induction of syncytia only at a low dilution ( Figure 4C ) .
Treatment of cells with 50 uM H ; O ; , caused a 6.4-fold increase in the production of the viral p24 protein and the cell culture supernatants from treated cells could induce the formation of syncytia at a 100-fold lower dilution than culture supernatants from control cells ( Figure 4C ) .
Treatment of cells with PMA showed effects very similar to those of H ; ,0O ; , .
The activation of the HIV-1 LTR and viral replication in T cells by H , O ; might be of great significance in the onset of HIV-1 production in AIDS patients that suffer from secondary infections and inflammatory processes .
NAC blocks the activation of NF-xB by H ; O ; NAC can raise intracellular GSH levels and thereby protect cells from the effects of ROI ( Aruoma et al .
, 1989 , and references therein ) .
In addition , the SH group of the agent can directly react with radicals .
Here , we have tested whether the activation of NF-xB by H ; O ; , in Jurkat T cells was sensitive to NAC which would indicate an involvement of oxygen radicals .
Cells were pre-incubated in the absence ( Figure 5A , lanes 1 , 3 and 4 ) or presence of 20 mM NAC ( lanes 2 , 5 and 6 ) followed by a treatment with 50 or 100 gM H , O ; ( lanes 3-6 ) .
As is seen in a fluorogram ( Figure SA ) and after Cerenkov counting of the protein-DNA complexes ( not shown ) , 20 mM NAC reduced the induction of NF-xB binding after H , O ; treatment by ~70 % .
NAC at a concentration of 30 mM showed an inhibition of 90 % ( see Figure 6 ) .
NAC did not have an inhibitory effect on two endogenous non-specific DNA-binding activities .
To test whether the millimolar amounts of NAC ( sodium form ) simply blocked the DNA-binding of NF-xB in the assay system , we incubated purified NF-xB with increasing amounts of NAC ( Figure 5B , lanes 3 to 6 ) .
All samples were adjusted to the same Na+ concentration because sodium ions had previously been shown to influence the DNA-binding activity of NF-xB ( Zabel et al .
, 1991 ) .
Even at a concentration of 100 mM NAC , no significant reduction in the amount of NF-xB-DNA complex was found ( Figure 5B , lane 6 ) .
Also , when NAC was added to cells at the end of an H , O ; treatment , no inhibition was observed ( Figure 5C , compare lanes 1 and 2 ) .
Since NAC can only react very slowly , if at all , with H , O , ( Aruoma et al .
, 1989 ) , our results suggest that NAC exerts its inhibitory effect on the activation of NF-xB primarily within intact cells by elevating GSH levels and/or by directly reacting with a metabolite of H ; , O0 ; .
Also other thiol compounds , such as 2-mercaptoethanol , dithiocarbamate , glutathione or disulfiram at concentrations in the micromolar to millimolar range potently blocked the activation of NF-xB ( R.Schreck and P.Bacuerle , in preparation ) .
We tested whether NF-xB is activated by H ; O ; in a cell free system ( Figure 5D ) .
NF-xB , NF-xB-IxB complex and a cytosolic fraction and nuclear extract from unstimulated Jurkat cells were treated for 30 min with 100 4M H ; O ; .
In contrast to intact cells , no induction of the binding activity 2252 Fig .
5 .
The effect of NAC on the activation of NF-xB by H ; O ; in vivo and in vitro .
( A ) The in vivo effect of NAC on the activation of NF-xB by H ; O ; .
Jurkat cells were incubated for 1 h in the absence ( lane 1 ) or presence of 20 mM NAC ( sodium form ) followed by a one hour treatment in the absence ( lane 2 ) or presence of 50 uM ( lane 5 ) or 100 aM H , O ; ( lane 6 ) .
Lanes 3 and 4 show a treatment with 50 and 100 uM H , O ; alone .
Nuclear extracts were analyzed by EMSA using a x enhancer probe .
A fluorogram of a native gel is shown .
The filled arrowhead indicates the position of the NF-xB-DNA complex , the open arrowhead the position of the unbound DNA probe .
( B ) The effect of NAC on the DNA-binding activity of NF-xB .
Purified NF-xB was incubated for 30 min with the indicated amounts of the sodium form of NAC .
By the addition of NaCl , all samples were adjusted to a final concentration of 100 mM sodium .
A binding reaction in the absence of NaCl or NAC is shown in lane 1 .
( C ) The effect of addition of NAC at the end of a H , O ; treatment .
After a 1 h incubation with 100 aM H ; O ; ( lane 1 ) , 20 mM NAC was added to the culture ( lane 2 ) and nuclear extracts prepared and analyzed by EMSA .
( D ) The effect of H , O ; in vitro on the binding activity of active NF-xB and its latent cytoplasmic form .
Purified NF-xB ( lanes 1 and 2 ) , purified NF-xB-IxB complex ( lanes 3 and 4 ) , and cytosol ( lanes 5 and 6 ) or nuclear extract ( lanes 7 and 8 ) from control Jurkat cells were incubated with 100 1M H , O , for 30 min at room temperature followed by a DNA-binding reaction for 30 min .
Samples were analyzed on native gels .
A fluorogram is shown .
of NF-xB was observed , suggesting that H , O , can not directly inactivate and release IxB from NF-xB ( Figure 5D , lanes 4 and 6 ) .
The DNA-binding of active NF-xB was also Fig .
6 .
The effect of NAC on the activation of NF-xB by five different agents .
Jurkat T cells were treated with PMA ( 50 ng/ml ; lanes 2 and 6 ) , human TNF-a ( 13 ng/ml ; lanes 3 and 7 ) , H , O , ( 100 uM ; lanes 4 and 8 ) , poly ( rl ) -poly ( rC ) ( r'rC , 0.1 mg/ml ; lanes 10 and 13 ) or cycloheximide ( CHX , 50 pg/ml ; lanes 11 and 14 ) for 3 h in the absence ( lanes 1-4 and 9-11 ) or presence of 30 mM NAC added 1 h prior to the activating treatment ( lanes 5-8 and 12-14 ) .
Nuclear extracts were prepared and analyzed by EMSA using a labeled x enhancer probe .
Fluorograms from two native gels are shown .
The filled arrowhead indicates the position of the NF-xB-DNA complex and the open arrowhead the position of unbound DNA probe .
not influenced by H ; O ; ( Figure 5D , lane 2 ) .
This finding lends further support to the idea that a metabolite of H , O ; is involved in the activation of NF-xB .
In contrast to NF-xB , the activation of the AP-1 factor by PMA appears not to depend on ROI because the presence of NAC did not effect the induction of AP-1 DNA-binding following a PMA treatment of cells ( R.Schreck and P.Baeuerle , in preparation ) .
This also suggests that NAC did not interfere with the activity of PKC .
Thiol compounds block the activation of NF-xB by many different agents Different agents are known to induce the DNA-binding activity of NF-xB .
Among them are TNF-a ( Osborn et al .
, 1989 ; Lowenthal et al .
, 1989 ) , PMA ( Sen and Baltimore , 1986 ) , double-stranded RNA ( Lenardo et al .
, 1989 ; Visvanathan and Goodbourn , 1989 ) , cycloheximide ( Sen and Baltimore , 1986 ) and H ; , O ; .
These agents are thought to act intracellularly by distinct signalling pathways .
TNF- was shown to activate NF-xB independently of PKC ( Meichle et al .
, 1990 ) , while PMA is thought to inactivate NF-xB by PKC which can phosphorylate and subsequently release IxB ( Ghosh and Baltimore , 1990 ) .
Double-stranded RNA could act via the dI kinase ( for review see London et al .
, 1987 ) and cycloheximide by preventing the synthesis of a labile inhibitor of NF-xB activation .
Finally , H , O ; seems to act via ROI as supported by the sensitivity of the induction towards NAC .
However , NAC was recently shown to also inhibit HIV-1 replication and transactivation of the HIV-1 LTR following TNF-a or PMA treatment of T cells ( Roederer et al .
, 1990 ) .
The effect of NAC was mediated by the NF-xB binding sites in the HIV-1 enhancer and the induction of the DNA-binding activity of NF-xB by TNF Activation of NF-xB by oxidant stress Table I .
The effect of two different thiol compounds on the activation of NF-xB by different agents in different cell lines .
NF-x activating Cell lines Inhibition by - Inhibition by agent tested 30 mM NAC 0.1 mM PDTC H , O ; Jurkat ++++ n.d. Ltk~ ++++ n.d. Tumor necrosis factor a Jurkat +++ +4 ++++ 702/73 n.d. ++++ Ltk~ n.d. ++++ Interleukin- 1 70273 +++ +++ Ltk= +++ n.d. Double-stranded RNA - Jurkat ++++ n.d. Lipopolysaccharide 70273 +++ ++++ PMA Jurkat +++ +4 ++++ 702/3 +++ ++++ Ltk~ n.d. ++++ PMA + lectin Jurkat ++++ ++++ Cycloheximide Jurkat +++ n.d. Calcium ionophore Jurkat ++++ n.d. Jurkat T cells , mouse fibroblasts ( Ltk~ ) and mouse pre-B cells ( 70Z/3 ) were treated as indicated with H , O ; ( 100 aM ; 2 h ) , human recombinant TNF-a ( 13 ng/ml ; 1-3 h ) , human recombinant IL-1 ( 10 U/ml ; 1-2 h ) , double-stranded RNA [ poly ( rl ) -poly ( rC ) ; 4 h ] , PMA ( 50 ng/ml ; 1-3 h ) , PMA plus lectin ( 5 ug/ml PHA ; 2 h ) , cycloheximide ( 10 ug/ml ; 3 h ) or the calcium ionophore A23187 ( 1 aM ; 3 h ) .
Cells were incubated in the absence or presence of 30 mM NAC or 0.1 mM PDTC added | h prior to the activating agents .
Nuclear extracts were analyzed by EMSA and the protein-DNA complex of NF-xB quantified by Cerenkov counting .
+++ , 50-75 % inhibition ; +++ + , 75-100 % inhibition `` Also reported by Staal er al .
( 1990 ) ; n.d. , not determined « and PMA is decreased by the compound ( Staal et al .
, 1990 ) .
In the following , we have investigated whether the activation of NF-xB in Jurkat T cells by five distinct agents is inhibited in each case by NAC .
Cells were incubated in the presence or absence of 30 mM NAC with the following compounds : the phorbol ester PMA ( Figure 6 , lane 2 ) , human TNF-a , ( lane 3 ) H ; O ; ( lane 4 ) , poly ( rl ) -poly ( rC ) ( lane 10 ) and cycloheximide ( lane 11 ) .
In all cases , a significant accumulation of active NF-xB in nuclear extracts from Jurkat T cells was seen .
PMA and cycloheximide gave the weakest induction of DNA-binding .
In the presence of NAC , the induction of NF-xB by all five agents was efficiently blocked ( Figure 6 , lanes 6-8 , 13 and 14 ) .
The extent of inhibition by NAC was very similar with the five inducers and was in the range 80-90 % as determined by Cerenkov counting of the radioactivity in the protein-DNA complexes .
In search of a more potent inhibitor of NF-xB , we tested a variety of other agents mainly encompassing thiol compounds and metal chelators ( R. Schreck and P. Baeuerle , to be published elsewhere ) .
Most of the agents showed inhibitory effects but at very different concentrations .
One of the most potent and specific agents was a pyrrolidone derivative of dithiocarbamate ( PDTC ) .
In Table I , we compare the effects of 30 mM NAC and 0.1 mM PDTC on the inhibition of NF-xB induction by the five agents shown in Figure 6 and by four other agents known to activate NF-xB .
These other agents were LPS , which is a strong inducer of NF-xB in the pre-B cell line 70Z/3 ( Sen and Baltimore , 1986 ) , IL-1 , which can activate NF-xB in 702/3 but not in Jurkat cells ( Osborn et al .
, 1989 ) and the calcium ionophore A23187 and the lectin phytohemagglutinin ( PHA ) which activate NF-xB in T cells strongly when in 2253 R.Schreck , P.Rieber and P.A.Baeuerle Fig .
7 .
A model showing the presumed involvement of reactive oxygen intermediates in the activation of NF-xB .
combination with PMA ( Nabel and Baltimore , 1987 ) but only weakly if applied on their own ( unpublished observation ) .
First , the inhibition of NF-xB by NAC and PDTC was not restricted to Jurkat cells but was also observed in a mouse fibroblast line ( Ltk= ) and a mouse pre-B cell line ( 70Z/3 ) ( Table I ) .
Second , both thiol agents , though chemically distinct , inhibited the induction of NF-xB binding activity regardless of the activating agent or cell line tested .
Third , the induction of NF-xB by LPS , IL-1 , calcium ionophore and PHA/PMA was also efficiently blocked by NAC and/or PDTC .
These result suggests that PMA , TNF-a , IL-1 , LPS , double-stranded RNA , cycloheximide , calcium ionophore , lectin and H , O , might all activate NF-xB by the same mechanism involving a NAC/PDTC-sensitive intracellular signalling step .
The common messenger which is sensitive to radical-scavenging thiol agents appears to be a reactive oxygen intermediate .
A model summarizing this idea is shown in Figure 7 .
Discussion Treatment of T cells with hydrogen peroxide induces the DNA-binding and nuclear appearance of a factor .
Evidence that this factor is NF-xB includes the xB-specific DNA-binding , the co-migration of its protein-DNA complex with that of purified NF-xB , its immunoreactivity with antisera raised against the DNA-binding subunit of NF-xB and the 2254 post-translational induction of its DNA-binding .
The activation of NF-xB by treatment of cells with H , O ; appears to be a specific event because ( i ) it occurs at low extracellular concentrations of H ; , O ; , ; ( ii ) other DNA-binding proteins appear to be unaffected by the treatment and ( iii ) because other kinds of cellular stress do not induce the activity of NF-xB under the conditions tested .
Addition of only 30 uM H ; O ; to the culture medium was sufficient to transactivate the HIV-LTR to an extent seen with TNF-a or a PMA/PHA treatment of cells .
It should however , be considered that H , O , can decompose in serum-containing medium ; within one hour the initial H , O ; concentration was found to decrease by 60 % ( Link and Riley , 1988 ) .
Enzymes released from cells , such as catalases , could further deplete the initial amount of H ; O ; , added to the cell cultures .
Presumably , the actual concentration of H , O ; that induced the activation of NF-xB and HIV-1 in cell cultures was therefore much lower than the theoretical one .
Another important criterion for the specificity of the H , O ; effect is that other cellular stress reactions such as heat shock and chemicals did not activate NF-xB .
Thus , xB elements in regulatory domains of genes appear to serve specifically as response elements for oxidant stress but not for other types of cellular stress .
It has recently been proposed that NF-xB is a transcription factor which has specialized in the organism to induce the synthesis of defense and signalling proteins rapidly upon exposure of cells to a wide variety of mostly pathogenic agents ( Baeuerle and Baltimore , 1991 ; Baeuerle , 1991 ) .
The present findings are fully consistent with this idea and add H ; O ; to the list of inducers produced under pathogenic conditions .
In liver cells , measurements have shown that the normal intracellular concentration of H , O ; is in the sub-micromolar range whereas other tissues such as the eye lens reach up to 25 uM ( for review see Halliwell and Gutteridge , 1990 ) .
In blood plasma of healthy subjects , values between 0.25 and 5 uM were determined ( Frei et al .
, 1988 ) .
These low basal levels make H , O ; a suitable signal for the activation of NF-xB when there is an increase in the extracellular H , O ; concentration during an inflammatory process .
It is well possible that the local H , O , concentrations in extracellular fluids during inflammatory processes are sufficient to activate NF-xB in tissue and blood cells thereby allowing induction of the synthesis of cytokines , immunologically active cell surface receptors and also of viruses such as HIV-1 .
The efficient propagation of HIV-1 in macrophages ( for review see Meltzer et al .
, 1990 ) might be related to the presence of an effective oxidative bi rst machinery in this cell type .
There is an overwhelmingly la ze number of reports dealing with the effects of oxygen radicals in biological and pathobiological systems .
Future studies can now address in these systems the role of NF-xB as a transcription factor which is specifically activated under conditions that increase the intracellular concentration of ROL .
Possible mechansims of H ; , O , -mediated NF-xB activation A central event in the post-translational activation of NF-xB is the release of the inhibitory subunit IxB from its complex with p65 and p50 in the cytoplasm ( for reviews see Baeuerle and Baltimore , 1991 ; Baeuerle 1991 ) .
Release of IxB allows DNA-binding of NF-xB and its translocation to the nucleus .
Any reaction that abolishes binding of IxB to p65 or damages IxB should thus enable the activation of NF-xB .
As shown in this study , H , O , on its own is unable to activate the purified NF-xB-IxB complex or that contained in a cytosolic fraction .
It therefore appears that a metabolite of H ; 0 ; or an intracellular reaction induced by H ; O ; , caused the release of IxB .
After its passive diffusion through the cell membrane , H , O , can be converted into more reactive oxygen compounds such as the superoxide anion , O , ~ , and the hydroxyl radical OH : ( for review , see Halliwell and Gutteridge , 1989 ) .
While OH - might react instantanously with any macromolecule , O , ~ is less reactive and can diffuse further prior to a reaction .
An involvement of radicals in the H ; , O ; -induced activation of NF-xB is supported by the inhibitory effect of NAC and that of various other thiol compounds tested ( R.Schreck and P.Baeuerle , in preparation ) .
NAC raises intracellular GSH levels and thereby provides GSH peroxidase with the co-substrate required to eliminate ROI ( for review , see Halliwell and Gutteridge , 1989 ) .
In addition , NAC can directly scavenge radicals ( Aruoma etal .
, 1989 ) .
The metal chelators desferroxamine , diethyldithiocarbamate and o-phenanthroline also blocked the induction of NF-xB by H , O , ( R.Schreck and P.Baeuerle , in preparation ) .
Metal ions such as Fe * are required for the interconversion of oxygen radicals .
Within cells , oxygen radicals can generate other reactive substances , for instance , by oxidizing membrane lipids ( for review see Wolff et al .
, 1986 ) .
However , it is unclear Activation of NF-xB by oxidant stress whether this can occur to a relevant extent at the low concentrations of H , O , used here to activate NF-xB .
ROI could directly activate NF-xB by degrading or modifying IxB in the cytoplasmic p50-p65-IxB complex .
The oxidation of a single cysteine residue in the DNA-binding domains of jun and fos proteins was recently found to allow regulation of the DNA-binding of the two proteins in vitro ( Abate et al .
, 1990 ) .
A similar reaction could selectively inactivate and release IxB from pSO-p65 .
A frequently observed effect of oxidant stress is also the induction of proteolysis ( for review see Pacifici and Davies , 1990 ) .
Oxidative damage or a controlled proteolytic degradation of IxB would both provide an irreversible mechansim of NF-xB activation .
This idea would be consistent with the preliminary observation that IxB released in vivo during a PMA treatment of pre-B cells can apparently not be reused to inhibit the activated NF-xB ( Baeuerle et al .
, 1988 ) .
In vitro studies are in progress to understand the precise role of ROI in the release of IxB from the cytoplasmic p50-p65-IxB complex .
Does protein kinase C directly activate NF-xB in vivo ?
The activation of NF-xB by PMA is inhibited by the radical scavengers NAC and PDTC .
We therefore discuss here the possibility that NF-xB is activated by ROI produced in response to the activation of PKC rather than directly by the kinase .
In vitro studies provided evidence for a direct phosphorylation of IxB by PKC ( Shirakawa and Mizel , 1989 ; Ghosh and Baltimore , 1990 ) .
Using highly purified components , we obtained the same results ( E.Link , L.Kerr , R.Schreck , U.Zabel , I. Vetma and P.Bauerle , submitted ) .
There is , however , also a series of observations that does not argue in favor of a direct mechanism .
Ghosh and Baltimore ( 1990 ) only observed activation of NF-xB by PKC with fractions highly enriched for p50-p65-IxB but not with crude cytosol .
Also the heme-regulated kinase and the cAMP-dependent kinase A can activate NF-xB in vitro although there is no conclusive evidence for an in vivo involvement of the two kinases in the activation of NF-xB .
This raises doubts about the specificity of the PKC reaction .
In HL-60 cells , TNF-a can rapidly induce PKC but the NF-xB activation by TNF-a is unchanged when PKC was depleted by chronic PMA treatment or inactivated by the inhibitors staurosporine and H-7 ( Schiitze et al .
, 1990 ; Meichle et al .
, 1990 ) .
Moreover , the PMA-induced activation of NF-xB in this cell line is very slow compared with that induced by TNF- « ( Hohmann et al .
, 1990 ) .
PKC could activate NF-xB by directly enhancing the activity of an NADPH oxidase-like enzyme .
These enzymes produce superoxide anions and H , O , from O ; , and NADPH .
In granulocytes and macrophages , PKC can activate the plasma-membrane bound NADPH oxidase within seconds after PMA stimulation causing the oxidative burst reaction ( Gennaro et al .
, 1986 ; Christiansen , 1988 ; Tauber et al .
, 1989 , and references therein ) .
PMA induces the production of superoxide anions not only in granulocytes and macrophages but also in many other cell types ( Rosen and Freeman , 1984 ; Matsubara and Ziff , 1986 ; Meier et al .
, 1989 , 1990 ) .
Staal et al .
( 1990 ) observed that treatment of Jurkat cells with PMA rapidly decreased intracellular thiol levels , supporting the idea that there is a depletion of GSH by oxidants .
Moreover , numerous studies have shown that the tumor-promoting effects of phorbol esters are inhibited by antioxidants ( for review see Cerutti , 1985 ) .
The inhibitory 2255 R.Schreck , P.Rieber and P.A.Baeuerle effect of the antioxidant NAC and PDTC on the activation by PMA of NF-xB but not of AP-1 strongly suggest that this effect of the phorbol ester treatment also relies on the production of ROL .
Reactive oxygen intermediates as widely used second messengers While there is good evidence that PMA can exert its effects on gene activity by interaction with its receptor PKC , the signal transduction pathway used by TNF is not known and apparently does not require PKC for the activation of NF-xB ( Meichle et al .
, 1990 ) .
Nevertheless , PMA and TNF both activate NF-xB from its latent cytoplasmic form and share xB elements as enhancers of gene expression .
The possibility is now raised that the two agents might activate NF-xB by a common pathway diverging upstream of IxB and involving oxygen radicals .
Support for this idea includes the observations that , ( i ) both PMA and TNF-a stimulate the production of superoxide anions and H , O ; in granulocytes , fibroblasts and other cell types ( Rosen and Freeman , 1984 ; Matsubara and Ziff , 1986 ; Klebanoff et al .
, 1986 ; Meier et al .
, 1989 , 1990 ) ; ( ii ) the activation of NF-xB by both agents is inhibited by the radical scavenger NAC and other thiol compounds ; and ( iii ) PMA and TNF cause a rapid depletion of the GSH levels in Jurkat T cells ( Staal et al .
, 1990 ) .
More evidence for an involvement of oxygen radicals in TNF-a « effects comes from experiments using oxygen depletion , thiol reagents and superoxide dismutase ( SOD ) , an enzyme eliminating the superoxide anion .
Anaerobic conditions ( Matthews er al .
, 1987 ) , agents elevating GSH levels ( Zimmerman et al .
, 1989 ) or the overexpression of SOD ( Wong et al .
, 1989 ) desensitized cells for the cytotoxic effects of TNF-a .
At present , it is not clear to what extent the cytotoxicity of TNF relies on the activation of NF-xB ( for a recent review see Larrick and Wright , 1990 ) .
In this study we tested nine conditions that were reported to induce NF-xB and , without any exception , the induction of NF-xB appeared to be dependent on oxygen radicals .
Future studies have to address the generality of this requirement by testing other conditions under which NF-xB is induced .
It is of great interest to see whether NAC and PDTC inhibit the effect of UV light on the induction of HIV-1 and NF-xB ( Valerie et al .
, 1988 ; Stein et al .
, 1989 ) and the activity of NF-xB-inducing viral transactivator proteins such as tax ( Leung and Nabel , 1988 ; Ballard et al .
, 1988 ) , X ( Twu et al .
, 1989 ) and iel ( Sambucetti et al .
, 1989 ) .
There are many ways in which intracellular levels of ROI could be increased .
One is to inhibit mechanisms for their elimination .
An alternative way is the induction of enzymes actively producing oxygen radicals .
Further experiments have to address in detail the origin of ROI produced in response to inflammatory cytokines and various other NF-xB activating agents and the putative role of ROI in signal transduction processes .
The activation of the cytoplasmic form of the NF-xB transcription factor will provide a valuable monitoring reaction for such studies .
A role of radicals as second messengers is not without precedent .
In the case of the nitric oxide radical ( NO ) such a role is now becoming widely accepted ( for review , see Crossin , 1991 ) .
NO stimulates guanylate cyclase and is known to relax vascular smooth muscle and to modulate messenger pathways in the developing and adult brain .
Does it make sense for the cell to engage highly toxic 2256 compounds as messenger molecules ?
First of all , ROI are not only undesired side products of cellular electron transfer reactions but there are ubiquitous enzyme systems which have specialized during evolution in the production of oxygen radicals and H , O .
Second , ROI are available in every cell type , either from intracellular reactions or , as H ; , O ; , from other cells .
Third , eukaryotic cells contain multiple enzymes allowing a precise and rapid regulation of intracellular levels of reactive oxygen intermediates , among them superoxide dismutase , the GSH peroxidase/GSH system , catalase and peroxidases .
Thus , ROI fulfil important prerequisites for second messenger molecules : they are small , diffusible and ubiquitous molecules that can be synthesized and destroyed rapidly .
However , there might be only a narrow concentration range in which they can function exclusively as second messengers .
At elevated concentrations , ROI serve as physiologically important cytotoxic agents .
Materials and methods Electrophoretic mobility shift assays Binding conditions for NF-xB were characterized and EMSAs performed as described in detail elsewhere ( Zabel er al .
, 1991 ) .
Briefly , binding reactions ( 20 gl ) contained 2 ug poly ( dI-dC ) ( Pharmacia ) , 5-10 000 c.p.m .
( Cerenkov ) P-labeled DNA probe , 2 ul buffer D ( Dignam et al .
, 1983 ) containing 1 % ( v/v ) Nonidet P-40 , 20 ug bovine serum albumin and binding buffer .
Binding reactions were started by the addition of cell extracts or purified protein and allowed for 30 min .
Samples were analyzed on native 4 % polyacrylamide gels .
Cells were fractionated into cytoplasm and nuclei , and cytosol and nuclear extracts were prepared as described ( Baeuerle and Baltimore , 1988a ) .
Equal proportions of cell fractions with 2-8 ug of protein were used in the assays .
Approximately 50 pg of purified human NF-xB was used per assay .
The NF-xB was purified from cytosol of human placenta as described in detail elsewhere ( Zabel er al .
, 1991 ) .
It consisted of the p50 and p6S subunits .
For the competition experiments , 0.1 ng of the labeled oligonucleotide was mixed with 0.25 , 2.5 and 25 ng of unlabeled competitor oligonucleotides prior to the addition of proteins .
The p50 antiserum was kindly given by Dr A. Israel ( Pasteur Institute , Paris ) and the c-rel antiserum by Dr Nancy Rice ( NCI , Frederick ) .
The antisera and a mix of pre-immune sera ( 1.5 l ) were diluted with a DNA-binding mix ( see above ) devoid of dithiothreitol and the labeled DNA probe .
After addition of nuclear extracts or purified NF-xB , reactions were allowed for 15 min at room temperature .
Thereafter the *°P-labeled DNA probe was added and the incubation continued for 30 min .
Samples were then subjected to electrophoresis .
NAC ( Sigma ) was adjusted to a neutral pH value by NaOH .
Oligonucleotides and plasmid constructs Oligonucleotides were synthesized on an Applied Biosystems synthesizer A380 by the phosphoroamidate method and purified on OPC cartridges { Applied Biosystems ) according to the instructions provided by the manufacturer .
The sequence of the double-stranded oligonucleotide encompassing the xB motif from the mouse x light chain enhancer is shown in Zabel er al .
( 1991 ) .
The sequences of the oligonucleotides used to detect the DNA-binding activities of octamer binding proteins ( oct ) , AP-1/c-fos , and glucocorticoid receptor were the following ( the binding site is underlined ) .. oct : 5'-AGCTTTGGGTAATITGCATTITTCTA-AG-3 ' ; - AP-l/c-fos : 5-AGCTTAAAAAAGCATGAGTCAGACACC-TG-3 ' ; glucocorticoid receptor : 5'-AGCTTGAGAACACAGTGTTCTGA-TCATGAGAACACAGTGTTCTCG-3 ' .
The complementary strands created 5'-overhanging ends ( Sall sites ) which allowed labeling by the Klenow polymerase ( Boehringer ) using one [ a- > P ] dNTP ( Amersham , 3000 Ci/mmol ) and the other three dNTPs in unlabeled form .
The labeled DNA probe was purified on push columns ( Stratagene ) .
The plasmids called HIV-LTR wt and HIV-LTR mu contain HIV-1 sequences from -453 to +80 from the transcription start site of the viral genome in front of a CAT reporter gene ( Nabel and Baltimore , 1987 ) .
In the HIV-LTR mu construct the two binding sites for NF-xB were altered by mutations as described ( Nabel and Baltimore , 1990 ) .
Cell culture , transfections and CAT assays Jurkat T cells were grown in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum ( FCS ) and 1 % ( w/v ) penicillin/streptomycin ( all purchased from Gibco Laboratories ) .
The medium did not contain iron salts which are known to promote the decomposition of H ; O ; into hydroxyl radicals .
IL-18 was purchased from Genzyme ( Boston ) , LPS , PHA , PDTC , NAC , A23187 , cycloheximide and PMA from Sigma and poly ( rl ) -poly ( rC ) from Pharmacia .
Transfections were performed by the DEAE -dextran method according to Pomerantz et al .
( 1990 ) .
Briefly , 1 % 10 ' cells were washed with PBS and resuspended in Tris-buffered saline containing DEAE-dextran ( Pharmacia ) at 200 ug/ml !
and 15 ug/ml of plasmid DNA in a total volume of 1 ml .
Incubations were continued for 90 min at 37°C with frequent agitation .
After a shock with 10 % ( v/v ) DMSO for 2 min at room temperature , cells were washed with PBS and resuspended in 20 ml of RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10 % FCS .
Twenty-four hours after transfection , cells were stimulated for 20 h with recombinant human TNF- @ ( 30 ng/ml , a kind gift from Hofmann LaRoche , Basel ) , a combination of PMA ( 50 ng/m ! )
and PHA ( 5 pg/ml ; both Sigma ) or H , O ; ( Merck ) .
Cell extracts were prepared by three freeze-thaw cycles and protein concentrations determined by the method of Bradford ( Biorad ) .
CAT activity was determined essentially as described ( Gorman er al .
, 1983 ) using samples of the same protein content .
In a reaction mix of 150 al containing 20 mM acetyl CoA ( Sigma ) and 0.3 Ci [ +C Jchloramphenicol ( Amersham ) , 100 pg of protein was incubated for 4 h at 37°C .
Reaction products were analyzed by thin-layer chromatography followed by autoradiography and liquid scintillation counting .
Transfections were performed in duplicate .
Mock transfections showed a chloramphenicol acetylation of 0.3 % .
p24 ELISA and syncytia induction assay Jurkat cells ( 3 x 10° cells/ml ! )
were infected with 10 IE of the HIV-1 isolate M899 ( kindly provided by Prof. Dr Giirtler , Pettenkofer Institut , Munich ) .
On day 8 post-infection , cells were washed .
On day eleven , cells were treated with 50 ng/ml PMA , 50 aM H ; 0 ; or left untreated .
The next day , cell culture supernatants were harvested .
The amount of p24 protein in the supernatants was determined by ELISA ( HIVAG-1 test from Abott GmbH , Wiesbaden-Delkenheim ) and the amount of newly produced virus quantified by a syncytia induction assay using C1866 cells ( Weiss er a/ .
, 1986 ) .
Acknowledgments We are indebted to Claudia Winter and Christine Federle for excellent technical assistance , Dr Georg Amold and Inge Leitner for synthesizing oligonucleotides , Cathy Schindewolf for helpful comments on the manuscript and Prof. Dr E.-L. Winnacker for his continuous support .
This work is part of the doctoral thesis of R.S .
and was supported by grants from the BMFT and DFG ( SFB 217 ; Ba 957/1-2 ) .
References Abate , C. , Patel , L. , Rauscher , F.J .
III and Curran , T .
( 1990 ) Science , 249 , 1157-1161 .
Ananthan , J. , Goldberg.A.L .
and Voellmy , G.R .
( 1986 ) Science , 232 , 522-524 .
Aruoma,0.1 .
, Halliwell , B. , Hoey , B .
M. and Butler , J .
( 1989 ) Free Radical Biol .
Med .
, 6 , 593-597 .
Ashburner , M. , and Bonner , J.J .
( 1979 ) Cell , 17 , 241-254 .
Bacuerle , P.A .
( 1991 ) Biochim .
Biophys .
Acta , in press .
Bacuerle , P.A .
and Baltimore , D .
( 1988a ) Cell , 53 , 211-217 .
Bacuerle , P.A .
and Baltimore , D .
( 1988b ) Science , 242 , 540-546 .
Bacuerle , P.A .
and Baltimore , D .
( 1989 ) Genes Dev .
, 3 , 1689-1698 .
Bacuerle , P .
A. and Baltimore , D .
( 1991 ) In Cohen , P .
and Foulkes , J.G .
( eds ) , Molecular Aspects of Cellular Regulation , Hormonal Control Regulation of Gene Transcription .
Elsevier/North Holland Biomedical Press , Amsterdam pp .
409-432 .
Bacuerie , P.A .
Lenardo , M. , Pierce , J.W .
and Baltimore , D .
( 1988 ) Cold Spring Harbor Symp .
Quant .
Biol .
, 53 , 789-798 .
Ballard , D. W. , Bohnlein , E. , Lowenthal , J .
W. , Wano , Y. , Franza , B.R .
and Greene , W.C. ( 1988 ) Science , 241 , 1652-1655 .
Ballard , D.W. , Walker , W.H .
, Doerre , S. , Sista , P. , Molitor , J.A .
, Dixon , E.P .
, Peffer , N.J. , Hannink , M .
and Greene , W.C. ( 1990 ) Cell , 63 , 803-814 .
Blake , Allen , R.E .
and Lunec.J .
( 1987 ) Brit .
Med .
Bull .
, 43 , 371-385 .
Bours , V. , Villalobos , J. , Burd , P.R .
, Kelly , K .
and Siebenlist , U .
( 1990 ) Nature , 348 , 76-80 .
Bradford .
M. ( 1976 ) Anal .
Biochem .
, 72 .
248 .
Brownell , E. , Ruscetti , F .
W. , Smith , R.G .
and Rice , N.R .
( 1988 ) Oncogene .
3 , 93-98 .
Cerutti , P.A .
( 1985 ) Science , 227 , 375-381 .
Activation of NF-xB by oxidant stress Christiansen , N.O .
( 1988 ) FEBS Len .
, 239 , 195-198 .
Ciavarra , R.P .
and Simeone , A .
( 1990 ) Cellular Immunol .
, 131 , 11-26 .
Crossin , K.L .
( 1991 ) Trends Biochem .
Sci .
, 16 , 81-82 .
Dignam , J.P. , Lebovitz , R.M .
and Roeder , ( 1983 ) Nucleic Acids Res .
, 11 , 1475-1489 .
Duh , E.J .
, Maury , W.J .
, Folks , T. M. , Fauci , A.S. and Rabson , A.B .
( 1989 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA , 86 , 5974-5978 .
Frei , B. , Yamamoto , Y. , Niclas , D. and Ames , B.N .
( 1988 ) Anal .
Biochem .
, 175 , 120-130 .
Geelen , J.L.M.C .
, Minnaar , R.P .
, Boom , R. , van der Nordaa , J .
and Goudsmit , J .
( 1988 ) - J. Gen .
Virol .
, 69 , 2913-2917 .
Gennaro.R .
, Florio , C .
and Romeo , D .
( 1986 ) Biochem .
Biophys .
Res .
Commun .
, 134 , 305-312 .
Ghosh , S .
and Baltimore , D. ( 1990 ) Nature , 344 , 678-682 .
Ghosh , S.. Gifford , A.M. , Riviere , L.R .
, Tempst , .P .
, Nolan , G.P .
and Baltimore , D .
( 1990 ) Cell , 62 , 1019-1029 .
Gorman , C.M .
, Merlino , G.T .
, Willingham , M.C .
, Pastan,1 .
and Howard , B.H .
( 1982 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA , 79 , 6777-6781 .
Halliwell , B .
and Gutteridge , J .
M.C .
( 1989 ) .
Free Radicals in Biology and Medicine .
Second Edition .
Clarendon Press , Oxford .
Halliwell , B .
and Gutteridge , J.M.C .
( 1990 ) Methods Enzymol .
, 186 , 1-85 .
Hohmann , H.-P. , Brockhaus , M. , Bacuerle , P .
A. , Remy , R. , Kolbeck , R .
and van - Loon , .A.P.G.M .
( 1990 ) J. Biol .
Chem .
, 265 , 22409-22417 .
Johnson , P.F .
and McKnight.S.L .
( 1989 ) Annu .
Rev .
Biochem .
, 58 , 799-839 .
Kawakami , K. , Scheidereit , C .
and Roeder , R.G .
( 1988 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sei .
USA , 85 , 4700-4704 .
Kieran , M. , Blank , V. , Logeat , F. , Vandekerckhove , J. , Lottspeich , F. , LeBail , O. , Urban , - MB .
, Kouriisky , P. , Baeuerle , P.A .
and Israel , A .
( 1990 ) Cell , 62 , 1007-1018 .
Klebanoff , S.J .
, Vadas.M.A .
, Harlan , J.M .
, Sparks , L.H .
, Gamble , J.R. , Agosti , J.M .
and Waltersdorph , A.M. ( 1986 ) J. Immunol .
, 136 , 4220-4225 .
Larrick , J.W .
and Wright , S.C .
( 1990 ) FASEB J. , 4 , 3215-3223 .
Lenardo , M.J. , Fan , C.-M. , Maniatis , T. and Baltimore , D. ( 1989 ) Cell , 57 , 287-294 .
Leung , K .
and Nabel , G.J .
( 1988 ) Nature , 333 , 776-778 .
Link , E.M .
and Riley , P.A .
( 1988 ) Biochem .
J. , 249 , 391-199 .
London , L M. , Levin , D.H. , Matts , R.L .
, Thomas , Pteryshyn , R. , and Chen , J.-J .
( 1987 ) In Boyer , P.D .
and Krebs , E.G .
( eds ) , The Enzymes .
Academic Press , New York .
Vol .
18 , pp .
359-380 .
Lowenthal , J .
W. , Ballard , Bohnlein , W. and Greene , W.C. ( 1989 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA , 86 , 2331-2335 .
Matthews , N. , Neale.M.L .
, Jackson , S.K .
and Stark , J.M .
( 1987 ) Immunology , 62 , 153-155 .
Matsubara.T .
and Ziff , M. ( 1986 ) J .
Cell .
Physiol .
, 127 , 207-210 .
Meichle , A. , Schiitze , $ .
, Hensel , G. , Brunsing , D .
and Kronke , M. ( 1990 ) J. Biol .
Chem .
, 265 , 8339-8343 .
Meier , B. , Radeke.H.H .
, Selle , S. , Younes , M. , Sies , H. , Resch.K .
and Habermehl , G.G .
( 1989 ) Biochem .
J. , 263 , 539-545 .
Meier , B. , Radeke , H.H .
, Selle,8 .
, Habermeh1 , G.G .
, Resch , K .
and Sies , H .
( 1990 ) Biol .
Chem .
Hoppe Seyler , 371 , 1021-1025 .
Meltzer .
M.S .
, Skillman , D.R .
, Hoover , D.L .
, Hanson , B.D .
, Turpin , J .
A. , Kalter.D.C .
and Gendelman , H.E .
( 1990 ) Immunology Today , 11 , 217-223 .
Messer , G. , Weiss , E.H .
and Bacuerle , P .
A .
( 1990 ) Cytokine , 2 , 389-397 .
Nabel.G .
and Baltimore , D .
( 1987 ) Nature , 326 , 711-713 .
Nabel , G.J .
and Baltimore , D .
( 1990 ) Nature , 344 , 178 .
Osborn , L. , Kunkel , $ .
and Nabel , G.J .
( 1989 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA , 86 , 2336-2340 .
Pacifici.R.E .
and Davies .
K.J .
A .
( 1990 ) Methods Enzymol .
, 186 , 485-502 .
Paul , N.L .
, - Lenardo.M.J.. Novak , K.D .
, Sarr , T. , Tang , W.-L. and Ruddle , N.H .
( 1990 ) J .
Virol .
, 64 , 5412-5419 .
Pomerantz , R.J. , Feinberg .
M.B .
, Trono , D .
and Baltimore , D. ( 1990 ) J. Exp .
Med .
, 172 , 253-261 .
Roederer , M. , Staal , F.J.T .
, Raju , P.A .
, Ela , S.W .
, Herzenberg.L .
A. and Herzenberg , L. A .
( 1990 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA , 87 , 4884-4888 .
Rosen , G.M .
and Freeman , B.A .
( 1984 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA , 81 , 7269-7273 .
Ruben , $ .
, Dillon , P.J .
, Schreck , R. , Henkel , T. , Chen , C.-H. , Maher , M. , Bacuerle , P.A .
and Rosen , C .
( 1991 ) Science , 251 , 1490-1493 .
Sambucetti , L.C .
, Cherrington , J .
M.. Wilkinson , G .
W.G .
and Mocarski , E.S .
( 1989 ) EMBO J. , 8 , 4251-4258 .
Schiitze , $ .
, Nottrott , S. , Pfizenmaier , K .
and Kronke , M. ( 1990 ) J .
Immunol .
, 144 , 2604-2608 .
Sen , R .
and Baltimore.D .
( 1986 ) Cell , 47 , 921-928 .
Shirakawa , F .
and Mizel , S.B .
( 1989 ) Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
, 9 , 2424-2430 .
2257 R.Schreck , P.Rieber and P.A.Baeuerle Staal , F.J.T .
, Roederer , M. , Herzenberg , L.A. and Herzenberg , L. A .
( 1990 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA , 87 , 9943-9947 .
Stein , B. , Rahmsdorf , H.J .
, Steffen , A. , Litfin , M .
and Herrlich , P. ( 1989 ) Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
, 9 , 5169-5181 .
Tauber , A.1I .
, Cox , J.A .
, Curnutte , J.T .
, Carrol , P.M. , Nakakuma , H. , Warren , B. , Gilbert , H. and Blumberg , P.M. ( 1989 ) Biochem .
Biophys .
Res .
Commun .
, 158 , 884-890 .
Tong-Starksen , $ .E .
, Luciw , P.A .
and Peterlin , B.M .
( 1989 ) J .
Immunol .
, 142 , 702-707 .
Twu , J.-S. , Chu , K .
and Robinson , W.S .
( 1989 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA , 86 , 5168-5172 .
Urban , and Bacuerle , P.A .
( 1990 ) Genes Dev .
, 4 , 1975-1984 .
Urban , M.B .
, Schreck , R .
and Baeuerle , P.A .
( 1991 ) EMBO J. , in press .
Valerie.K .
, Delers , A. , Bruck , C. , Thiriart , C. , Rosenberg , H. , Debouck , C .
and Rosenberg , M. ( 1988 ) , 333 , 78-81 .
Visvanathan , K.V .
and Goodboumn , S .
( 1989 ) EMBO J. , 8 , 1129-1138 .
Weiss , R.A. , Clapham , P.R .
, Weber , J.N .
, Dalgleish , A.G. , Lasky , L.A .
and Berman .
, P.W .
( 1986 ) Nature , 324 , 572-575 .
Wong , G.H .
W. , Elwell , J .
H. , Oberley , L .
W. and Goeddel , D.V .
( 1989 ) Cell , 58 , 923-931 .
Wolff , S.P .
, Garner , A. and Dean , R.T .
( 1986 ) Trends Biochem .
Sci .
, 11 , 27-31 .
Zabel , U .
and Bacuerle , P.A .
( 1990 ) Cell , 61 , 255-265 .
Zabel , U. , Schreck , R .
and Bacuerle , P.A .
( 1991 ) J. Biol .
Chem .
, 266 , 252-260 .
Zimarino , V .
and Wu , C .
( 1987 ) Nature , 327 , 727-730 .
Zimmerman , R.J. , Marafino , B.J.Jr .
, Chan , A. , Landre , P .
and Winkelhake , J.L .
( 1989 ) J .
Immunol .
, 142 , 1405-1409 .
Received on February 15 , 1991 ; revised on April 12 , 1991 Note added in proof While this manuscript was in press , Devary et al .
( Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
, 11 ( 1991 ) , 2804-2811 ) also reported that the DNA binding of AP-1 transcription factor is induced with H ; O ; treatment .
In the study , 250 4M H ; O ; was used for stimulation which might be the reason why we have not detected AP-1 DNA binding with H , O ; treatment at 100 aM ( see Figure 3 ) .
2258
