MoLECcULAR AND CELLULAR BIOLOGY , Feb. 1994 , p. 1153-1159 0270-7306/94/ $ 04.00+0 Copyright © 1994 , American Society for Microbiology Vol .
14 , No .
2 Activation of the Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor Promoter in T Cells Requires Cooperative Binding of Elf-1 and AP-1 Transcription Factors CHUNG-YIH WANG , ALEXANDER G. BASSUK , * LAWRENCE H. BOISE , `` > * CRAIG B. THOMPSON , * > * RODRIGO BRAVO , * anp JEFFREY M. LEIDEN®'** Departments of Medicine , `` Pathology , `` and Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology® and The Howard Hughes Medical Institute , `` University of Chicago , Chicago , Illinois 60637 , and Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Institute , Princeton , New Jersey 08543 `` Received 12 May 1993/Returned for modification 20 July 1993/Accepted 8 November 1993 The granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor ( GM-CSF ) gene has been studied extensively as a model system of transcriptional induction during T-lymphocyte activation .
The GM-CSF gene is not expressed in resting peripheral blood T cells but is rapidly induced at the transcriptional level following activation through the cell surface T-cell receptor .
A highly conserved 19-bp element located immediately 5 ' of the human GM-CSF TATA box ( bp -34 to -52 ) , herein called purine box 1 ( PB1 ) , has been shown to bind a T-cell nuclear protein complex and to be required for transcriptional induction of the GM-CSF gene following T-cell activation .
The PB1 sequence motif is highly conserved in both human and murine GM-CSF genes .
In this report , we demonstrate that the PB1 element alone confers inducibility on a heterologous promoter following transfection into human Jurkat T cells .
In addition , we identify a major PB1 nuclear protein-binding complex that is not present in resting peripheral blood T cells but is rapidly induced following T-cell activation .
Sequence analysis revealed that PBI is composed of adjacent binding sites for Ets and AP-1 transcription factors .
In vitro mutagenesis experiments demonstrated that both the Ets and AP-1 sites are required for binding of the inducible PB1 nuclear protein complex and for the transcriptional activity of this element and the GM-CSF promoter in activated T cells .
Using antibodies specific for different Ets and AP-1 family members , we demonstrate that the major inducible PB1-binding activity present in activated T-cell nuclear extracts is composed of the Elf-1 , c-Fos , and JunB transcription factors .
Taken together , these results suggest that cooperative interactions between specific Ets and AP-1 family members are important in regulating inducible gene expression following T-cell activation .
The activation of normal peripheral blood T cells results in the precisely orchestrated transcriptional induction of more than 100 new genes , many of which are important mediators of the inflammatory response to foreign pathogens ( 7 ) .
Activation-specific T-cell genes include those encoding cell surface molecules that induce important changes in T-cell adhesion as well as a number of lymphokines , such as IL-2 ( interleukin-2 ) , IL-3 , gamma interferon , and GM-CSF ( gran-ulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor ) , which can function in both autocrine and paracrine pathways to control the proliferation and function of multiple inflammatory cell types ( 7 ) .
Given the importance of inducible T-cell genes in modulating the inflammatory response , the elucidation of the molecular mechanisms underlying inducible transcription in T cells may yield important insights into both normal and pathophysiological T-cell function .
Several genes have been characterized extensively as model systems for understanding inducible transcription in T cells .
These include the IL-2 ( 2 , 4 , 8 , 10 ) , IL-3 ( 27 , 30 ) , GM-CSF ( 5 , 6 , 24 ) , and human immunodeficiency virus long terminal repeat ( 1 , 18 , 20 , 22 ) genes .
The GM-CSF gene is among the best characterized of these inducible T-cell genes .
GM-CSF is a potent cytokine that stimulates the proliferation and maturation of several hematopoietic lineages , including neutrophils , macrophages , and eosinophils ( 6 , 11 , * Corresponding author .
Mailing address : BRH B608 MC6080 , University of Chicago , 5841 S. Maryland Ave. , Chicago , IL 60637 .
Phone : ( 312 ) 702-1919 .
Fax : ( 312 ) 702-1385 .
1153 23 , 35 ) .
GM-CSF is not expressed in resting T cells but is induced at the transcriptional level during the first 20 h following T-cell activation ( 6 ) .
Previous studies have demonstrated that the transcriptional induction of the human GM-CSF gene in T cells is mediated at least in part by a 90-bp element located directly upstream of the transcriptional start site ( bp -53 to +37 ) ( 29 ) .
DNase I footprint analyses of this promoter element demonstrated binding of a T-cell nuclear protein complex to a 19-bp purine-rich region ( herein called purine box 1 [ PB1 ] ) located between bp -34 and -52 ( 28 ) .
Subsequent in vitro mutagenesis experiments demonstrated that this region is required for the inducible expression of the intact GM-CSF promoter in T cells .
Interestingly , the PB1 sequence motif is highly conserved in both the murine and human GM-CSF genes ( 24 ) and is also present in the 5 flanking regions of the human and murine IL-5 genes ( 29 ) .
Although these previous studies demonstrated that the PB1 element is required for inducible expression of the GM-CSF gene in T cells , it remained unclear whether this element alone was sufficient to confer inducible expression on a minimal promoter in T cells .
More importantly , the identities of the transcription factors that bind to PBI to mediate GM-CSF transcriptional activation remained unclear .
In the studies described in this report , we demonstrate that ( i ) the PB1 element alone , when multimerized upstream of a minimal promoter , functions as an inducible transcriptional element in T cells , ( ii ) PBI is composed of adjacent Ets and AP-1 binding sites , both of which are required for 1154 WANG ET AL .
binding of an inducible T-cell nuclear complex and for the transcriptional activity of PBI in activated T cells , ( iii ) both the Ets and AP-1 binding sites are also required for the inducible activity of the GM-CSF promoter in T cells , and ( iv ) the major inducible PB1-binding complex in activated T-cell nuclear extracts contains Elf-1 , c-Fos , and JunB .
Taken together , these results suggest that cooperative binding of specific Ets and AP-1 family members to inducible promoters plays an important role in regulating activation-specific gene expression in T cells .
MATERIALS AND METHODS Cells and cell lines .
Human peripheral blood lymphocytes ( PBL ) were isolated from buffy coats obtained by leukapher-esis of healthy 21- to 31-year-old donors by density gradient centrifugation as described previously ( 18 ) .
Purified cells were > 99 % lymphocytes as determined by Wright staining .
Viability was greater than 99 % as measured by trypan blue exclusion .
PBL were cultured at a concentration of 2 x 10 % /ml in RPMI 1640 medium ( GIBCO , Grand Island , N.Y. ) supplemented with 10 % heat-inactivated fetal calf serum ( GIBCO ) , 2 mM L-glutamine , 100 U of penicillin G per mil , 100 ug of streptomycin per ml , and 15 mM N-2-hydroxyeth-ylipiperazine-N'-2-ethanesulfonic acid ( HEPES ; pH 7.4 ) ( GIBCO ) .
PBL were activated by treatment for 6 to 8 h with phorbol myristate acetate ( PMA ; 10 ng/ml ) plus ionomycin ( 0.4 pg/ml ) .
Human Jurkat and murine ELA T-cell tumor cells were grown in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum and penicillin-streptomycin ( GIBCO ) as described previously ( 18 ) .
Plasmids .
The GM-CSFCAT , mEIf-1CAT , and mAP-1CAT plasmids were made by cloning three copies of the following synthetic oligonucleotides into the Smal site of pSPCAT ( 31 ) : GM-CSFCAT , ACAGTTAGAGGAAATGAT TAATGGTG ; mEIf-1CAT , ACAGTTATGCCAAATGATT AATGGTG ; and mAP-1CAT , ACAGTTAGAGGAAATAT TGGATGGTG .
The GM-CSFPrLuc plasmid was made by cloning the human GM-CSF promoter ( bp -55 to +39 ) into the HindIII sites of the pGL2-Basic vector ( Promega , Madison , Wis. ) .
The GM-CSFPrmEIf-1Luc and GM-CSFPrmAP-1 Lue plasmids are identical to GM-CSFPrLuc except that they contain mutations in the Elf-1 and AP-1 sites as shown in Fig .
1 .
The pRSVBgal reference plasmid , in which the bacterial lacZ gene is under the control of the Rous sarcoma virus long terminal repeat , has been described previously ( 9 ) .
Nuclear extracts .
Normal human PBL were washed with phosphate-buffered saline and incubated in buffer A ( 10 mM HEPES [ pH 7.9 ] , 1.5 mM MgCl , , 10 mM KCI , 0.5 mM dithiothreitol , 0.2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride ) for 10 min at 4°C .
Cells were collected by centrifugation at 1,500 x g for 2 min and lysed by incubation in buffer C ( 20 mM HEPES [ pH 7.9 } , 25 % glycerol , 420 mM NaCl , 1.5 mM MgCl , , 0.2 mM EDTA , 0.5 mM dithiothreitol , 0.2 mM phenylmethyisulfonyl fluoride ) at 4°C for 20 min .
Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 15,000 x g for 2 min at 4°C , aliquoted , and frozen at -70°C .
Protein concentrations were determined by using a commercially available kit ( Bio-Rad , Richmond , Calif. ) .
EMSAs .
The following double-stranded oligonucleotides containing overhanging BamHI-Bgill ends were synthesized on an Applied Biosystems model 380B DNA synthesizer and labeled with *°P-nucleotides by fill-in with the Klenow fragment of DNA polymerase I prior to use in electro- Mor .
CELL .
BioL .
phoretic mobility shift assays ( EMSAs ) : GM-CSF , ACAGT TAGAGGAAATGATTAATGGTG ; mElf-1 , ACAGTTATG CCAAATGATTAATGGTG ; mAP-1 , ACAGTTAGAGGAA ATATTGGATGGTG ; Ta3 , GAGATAGCATCGCCCCAG GCCACGTGCCGAG ; Tal , CTCCCATTITTCCATGACGTC ATGGTTACCA ; and mNIP , GATCCACCTTCTITTCACT TGTTCCCA .
Mixtures for binding reactions using T-cell nuclear extracts contained 2.0 pug of T-cell nuclear protein , 30,000 dpM ( 0.1 to 0.5 ng ) of radiolabeled oligonucleotide probe , 250 ng of poly ( dI-dC ) in 50 mM KCl , 10 mM Tris ( pH 7.5 ) , 10 mM HEPES , 1.25 mM dithiothreitol , 1.1 mM EDTA , and 15 % ( vol/vol ) glycerol in a final reaction volume of 15 pul .
Following incubation at room temperature for 30 min , DNA-protein complexes were fractionated by electrophoresis in nondena-turing 5 % polyacrylamide gels at 120 V for 4 h at 4°C in TBE buffer ( 0.089 M Tris-borate , 0.089 M boric acid , 0.002 M EDTA ) .
For competition experiments , 5 or 50 ng of unlabeled competitor oligonucleotide was added to the binding reactions before the addition of the radiolabeled oligonucleotide probe .
For antibody supershift experiments , 1 to 2 pl of the appropriate antibody was added to nuclear extract and incubated at 4°C for 15 min prior to use in EMSAs as described above .
All gels were dried and subjected to autoradiography using intensifying screens as described previously ( 31 ) .
Transfections and CAT assays .
Exponentially growing cultures containing 10° Jurkat T cells were transfected with 5 ug of reporter plasmid and 1 ug of the pRSVRBgal reference plasmid , using DEAE-dextran as described previously ( 31 ) .
Transfections of murine ELA cells were identical except that they were done with 10 ug of reporter plasmid .
Thirty-six hours after transfection , cultures were treated with medium alone or PMA ( 50 ng/ml ) plus ionomycin ( 1.5 pg/ml ) .
Cells were harvested 10 to 12 h after stimulation , and cell extracts normalized for protein content by using a commercially available kit ( Bio-Rad ) were assayed for chloramphenicol acetyltransferase ( CAT ) and B-galactosidase activities as described previously ( 31 ) .
Antibodies .
Preparation and specificities of the anti-Elf-1 ( « -Elf-1 ) ( 18 ) , « -c-Fos ( 17 ) , « -JunB ( 17 ) , « -JunD ( 17 ) , a-Fra-1 ( 17 ) , and a-cyclin D1 ( 21 ) rabbit antisera have been described previously .
The « -Ets-1 and a-c-Myc antibodies were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology ( Santa Cruz , Calif. ) .
The a-Jun family ( a « -Jun ) and « -fos family ( a-Fos ) rabbit antisera recognize all known members of the Jun and Fos protein families , respectively ( 24 ) .
The « -cyclin D1 rabbit antiserum was the generous gift of C. Sherr ( 21 ) .
RESULTS PB1 contains adjacent Ets and AP-1 binding sites and binds an inducible T-cell nuclear protein complex .
Sequence analysis of the PBI element ( bp -41 to -59 ; antisense strand ) of the murine GM-CSF promoter revealed the presence of adjacent potential binding sites for Ets ( A/CGGAA/T ) and AP-1 ( TGANTCA ) transcription factors ( Fig .
1 ) .
These sites have been highly conserved in the human GM-CSF promoter and are also present with a similar spacing in the 5 ' flanking regions of the human and murine IL-5 promoters ( Fig .
1B ) .
Interestingly , the NFAT sites of the IL-2 promoter also contain adjacent Ets and AP-1 binding sites , both of which have been shown previously to be essential for binding of NFAT and for the inducible function of this element in activated T cells ( 2 , 31 ) .
However , in the case of the NFAT element , the Ets and AP-1 binding sites are separated by 3 Vor .
14 , 1994 A. APA _ Ei GTGGTCACCATTAATCATTTCCTG AACTGTGTeTATAAGA N mAP-1 : CC AT `` 5 _ -30 GGCA GCTCTTTTGCAGTGAGCCCAGTA | 1 EH- APA TeatTe Ac cGacaaaah ac ACAGA TeacaaaataaaTAAT1G GM-CSF ( -39 to -60 ) : IL-2 ( -286 to -262 ) : IL-5 ( -44 to 57 ) : FIG .
1 .
Location and sequence of the PB1 element from the murine GM-CSF promoter .
( A ) Nucleotide sequence of the proxi-mal murine GM-CSF promoter .
The top line shows the sequence of nucleotides -63 to +1 ( 24 ) .
The potential AP-1 and Elf-1 binding sites which together comprise PBI are boxed and labeled .
The nucleotide substitutions made in the mutant AP-1 ( mAP-1 ) and Elf-1 ( mEIf-1 ) sequences are shown below the promoter sequence .
The nucleotides involved in binding the inducible PBI nuclear protein complex ( see Fig .
2 ) from activated normal human T cells were determined by methylation interference and are marked ( @ ) in panel B .
( B ) Comparison of purine-rich nuclear protein-binding sites from the GM-CSF promoter ( PB1l ) ( 29 ) , the IL-2 promoter/enhancer ( NFAT ) ( 31 ) , and the IL-5 promoter ( 25 ) .
bp , whereas these sites are directly adjacent to each other in the GM-CSF and IL-5 promoters ( Fig .
1B ) .
The significance of this difference is discussed further below .
To determine whether PB1 binds an inducible T-cell nuclear protein complex and , if so , whether the Ets and AP-1 sites are required for binding , we performed a series of EMSAs using a radiolabeled PBI probe and nuclear extracts from resting or activated normal human peripheral blood T cells ( Fig .
2 and 3 ) .
As shown in Fig .
2 , PBI binds two major nuclear protein complexes .
The complex displaying slower electrophoretic mobility ( Fig .
2 , arrow ) was barely detectable in resting peripheral blood T-cell nuclear extracts but was significantly induced following 8 h of activation with PMA plus ionomycin .
This inducible PB1l-binding complex represented a sequence-specific DNA-binding activity because it was efficiently competed for by excess unlabeled PBI competitor oligonucleotide but not by two unrelated control oligonucleotide competitors , Ta3 and mNIP ( Fig .
3 ) .
Binding of this inducible complex ( Fig .
3 , arrow ) required both the Ets and AP-1 sites , since mutations in either site abolished the ability of the resulting oligonucleotide to compete for binding of this complex to the wild-type labeled PBI probe ( Fig .
3 ; compare the GM-CSF competitor with the mAP-1 and mEIf-1 competitors ) .
In addition , methylation interference experiments demonstrated that G residues in both the Ets and AP-1 sites were required for binding of the inducible PB1 complex ( Fig .
1B ) .
Thus , these experiments demonstrated that PBIl binds an inducible T-cell nuclear protein complex and that this binding activity requires both the Ets and AP-1 motifs of PB1 .
Moreover , the finding that oligonucleotides containing mutations in either the Ets or AP-1 site were unable to efficiently compete for binding of the PB1 complex suggests that PB1 complex formation requires cooperative binding of proteins to the Ets and AP-1 sites .
In addition to the inducible binding complex described above , PBI bound a nuclear protein complex that displayed TRANSCRIPTIONAL ACTIVATION OF THE GM-CSF PROMOTER IN T CELLS 1155 ke ] 0 a= P +1 FIG .
2 .
Binding of an inducible T-cell nuclear protein complex to the PB1 motif from the murine GM-CSF promoter .
A radiolabeled oligonucleotide containing the PB1 element of the murine GM-CSF promoter ( bp -33 to -58 ; see Fig .
1A ) was used in EMSAs with nuclear extracts prepared from resting normal human peripheral blood T cells ( Med ) or duplicate cultures of T cells activated for 8 h with PMA plus ionomycin ( P + I ) .
The inducible PBl-binding activity is indicated by an arrow .
more rapid mobility by EMSAs ( Fig .
2 ) .
The significance of this complex remains unclear .
It is present in equal concentrations in both resting and activated T-cell nuclear extracts ( Fig .
2 ) .
Moreover , it was efficiently competed for by both the wild-type unlabeled PB1 oligonucleotide and the unlabeled PBI oligonucleotide containing mutations in the Ets site ( mEIf-1 ) but was not competed for by the PBI oligonucleotide containing mutations in the AP-1 site ( Fig .
3 , mAP-1 ) or by the unrelated Ta3 or mNIP oligonucleotide ( Fig .
3 ) .
Thus , it appears to represent a constitutive activity which binds to the AP-1 site of PB1 .
Of note , none of the bands in these EMSAs are competed for by oligonucleotides containing mutations in the AP-1 site , suggesting that binding of proteins to the Ets site of the PBI oligonucleotide requires simultaneous binding of proteins to the AP-1 site .
In addition to these two major PB1l-binding activities , a third minor complex of slower electrophoretic mobility was detected in some EMSAs ( Fig .
3 ) .
The identity and sequence specificity of this binding activity remains unclear , as it was not consistently demonstrated in T-cell nuclear extracts .
PB1 confers inducible expression on a heterologous promoter following T-cell activation .
To determine whether PBI alone is able to function as an inducible element in T cells , we cloned three copies of the PBI oligonucleotide 5 ' of a minimal simian virus 40 ( SV40 ) promoter and bacterial CAT reporter gene and transfected the resulting plasmid into human Jurkat T cells .
Thirty-six hours after transfection , the cultures were divided in half ; one half was treated with medium alone for 10 h , while the other half was activated by treatment with PMA plus ionomycin for 10 h. As shown in Fig .
4 , the SV40 promoter alone was inactive in both resting and activated T cells .
In contrast , the reporter plasmid containing three copies of the wild-type PB1 element 5 ' of 1156 WANG ET AL .
Competitor ( ng ) am-csr __| __| 5 ] 50 _| | ] yaa |_ { | Flisted mNIP _| | | 1s Po p -LX RCL .
mAP-1 | | | 5 |50 mElf-1 7 | | | 1550 -- Bs Clk is _. Cl th ace pup wa das Oh .. & & FIG .
3 .
PBI binding requires both AP-1 and Elf-1 motifs .
A radiolabeled oligonucleotide containing the PBI element from the murine GM-CSF promoter ( bp -33 to -58 ; see Fig .
1A ) was used in EMSAs with nuclear extracts prepared from normal human T cells activated for 8 h with PMA plus ionomycin .
Unlabeled competitor oligonucleotides ( 5 or 50 ng ) corresponding to the wild-type GM-CSF probe ( GM-CSF ) or mutants containing nucleotide substitutions in the AP-1 ( mAP-1 ) or Elf-1 ( mEIf-1 ) motif ( see Fig .
1A ) were added to the binding reaction mixtures as shown .
Ta3 and mNIP are unrelated control competitor oligonucleotides .
The inducible PB1-binding activity corresponding to that shown in Fig .
2 is denoted with an arrow .
Note that this binding activity was competed for only by the wild-type unlabeled GM-CSF oligonucleotide , not by mutant oligonucleotide competitors containing nucleotide substitutions in either the AP-1 or Elf-1 motif .
In contrast , the noninducible PB1-binding activity that displays more rapid electrophoretic mobility was competed for by both wild-type and mElf-1 oligonucleotides but not by the mAP-1 competitor .
the SV40 promoter was inactive in resting T cells but was induced 36-fold following T-cell activation .
To determine whether the Ets and AP-1 sites were important for the inducible activity of PB1 , we cloned three copies of PBI oligonucleotides containing mutations in either the Ets ( mEIf-1 ) or AP-1 ( mAP-1 ) site ( Fig .
4A ) upstream of the minimal SV40 promoter and repeated the transfections into Jurkat cells .
Mutations of either the AP-1 or Ets site that abolished binding of the inducible PBl-binding complex ( Fig .
3 ) also abolished the ability of PBI to function as an inducible transcriptional element in T cells ( Fig .
4B ) .
Therefore , both the Ets and AP-1 sites in PB1 are required for binding of an activation-specific T-cell nuclear protein complex and for the inducible transcriptional activity of this element in T cells .
The Ets and AP-1 sites of PB1 are both required for transcriptional induction of the GM-CSF promoter in T cells .
Previous studies have demonstrated that the sequences located between bp -53 and +37 of the human GM-CSF promoter confer inducible transcriptional activity on a reporter plasmid following T-cell activation ( 28 ) .
To determine whether both the Ets and AP-1 sites of PB1 are required for transcriptional induction of the GM-CSF promoter in T cells , we constructed a series of reporter plasmids in which the firefly luciferase gene is under the transcriptional control of the wild-type human GM-CSF promoter ( bp -55 to +39 ) ( GM-CSFPrLuc ) or the GM-CSF promoter containing mu Mor .
CELL .
BroL .
A. EM1 __ APA GM-CSF : - ACAGTTAGAGGAAATGATiAAracta mElf-1 : Tace maAP-1 : AT GG Fold Induction g 8 8 8 FIG .
4 .
Inducible transcriptional activity of the PB1 element requires both Elf-1 and AP-1 motifs .
( A ) Nucleotide sequences of the wild-type ( GM-CSF ) and mutant AP-1 ( mAP-1 ) and Elf-1 ( mEIf-1 ) oligonucleotides .
The Elf-1 and AP-1 motifs are boxed and labeled .
( B ) Transient transfections using PBI reporter constructs .
Jurkat human T cells were transfected with CAT reporter constructs containing three copies of the wild-type or mutant PB1 oligonucleotides cloned 5° of the minimal SV40 promoter ( SV40pr ) ( left ) .
As a negative control , the pSPCAT reporter containing the minimal SV40 promoter but lacking all GM-CSF sequences was used in a parallel transfection .
All transfection mixtures also contained the pRSV Bgal reference plasmid to correct for differences in transfection efficiencies .
Thirty-six hours after transfection , the cultures were divided in half .
Half of each culture was left unstimulated , while the other half was activated by treatment with PMA plus ionomycin for 10 h. Cells were harvested , and CAT and B-galactosidase activities were determined from extracts normalized for protein content .
Fold induction = CAT activity in activated cultures/CAT activity in unstimulated cultures after normalization for differences in transfection efficiencies .
All transfections were repeated three to five times .
The standard error bars for the pSPCAT , mEIf-1CAT , and mAP-1CAT transfections are too small to be shown on this scale .
tations in the Elf-1 ( GM-CSFPrmElf-1Luc ) or AP-1 ( GM-CSFPrmAP-1Luc ) site of PBI ( Fig .
1 ) .
These reporter constructs were transfected into EL4 T cells , and the cultures were divided in half .
One half was treated with medium alone , while the other half was activated for 12 h by treatment with PMA plus ionomycin .
In agreement with previous results ( 28 ) , the wild-type GM-CSF promoter was induced approximately sixfold following T-cell activation ( Fig .
5 ) .
Mutation of either the Elf-1 or AP-1 site decreased inducibility to 1.2- or 1.4-fold , respectively .
Thus , both the EIlf-1 and AP-1 sites are required for the inducible transcriptional activity of the GM-CSF promoter in T cells .
The inducible PB1-binding complex contains specific AP-1 and Ets family members .
The results of experiments described above are consistent with a model in which the cooperative binding of Ets and AP-1 transcription factors to PBI1 is required for the inducible expression of the GM-CSF gene following T-cell activation .
However , binding-site sequence analysis alone is insufficient to determine the identities of the cognate transcription factors that bind to a given sequence motif .
Therefore , it remained formally possible that one or more non-Ets and/or non-AP-1 family members were binding to PBI to mediate its inducible transcriptional activity .
Moreover , both the Ets and AP-1 transcription factor families contain multiple members .
Thus , the identities of the putative Ets and AP-1 PB1-binding factors remained unclear .
Vor .
14 , 1994 Fold Induction 24 FIG .
5 .
Both AP-1 and Ets binding sites are required for inducible expression of the GM-CSF promoter in T cells .
EL4 T cells were transfected with luciferase reporter constructs containing the wild-type GM-CSF promoter ( bp ~55 to +39 ) ( GM-CSFPrLuc ) or the identical promoter with mutations in the Elf-1 ( GM-CSFPrmElf-1Luc ) or AP-1 ( GM-CSFPrmAP-1Luc ) site of PBI as shown in Fig .
1 .
All transfections also contained the pRSVBgal reference plasmid .
Thirty-six hours after transfection , the cultures were divided in half .
One half was treated with medium alone , while the other half was activated with PMA plus ionomycin .
Twelve hours after stimulation , cells were harvested and cell extracts equalized for protein content were assayed for luciferase and B-galactosidase activities .
The results are expressed as fold induction ( = luciferase activity in the stimulated culture/luciferase activity in the unstimulated culture ) following correction for differences in transfection efficiencies .
All transfections were repeated at least three times , and results are shown as mean + standard error .
To further address these issues , we examined whether antibodies specific for individual Ets and AP-1 family members would bind to the major inducible PB1-binding complex present in activated T-cell nuclear extracts .
As shown in Fig .
6 , the binding of this complex was completely abolished by « -Elf-1 antibodies ( Fig .
6A and C , « -Elf-1 ) as well as by antisera that recognize all Jun or all Fos family members ( Fig .
6B , a-jun Family and « -fos Family ) .
These results suggested that all of the complexes contain Elf-1 and one or more AP-1 family members .
A number of control experiments were performed to confirm that these results represented specific inhibition of binding activity .
First , it has previously been shown that the « -Elf-1 antiserum used in these studies does not cross-react with Ets-1 , Ets-2 , or GABPa ( 18 , 32 ) .
In addition , the « -Elf-1 antiserum does not affect the binding or mobility of AP-1 nuclear complexes to consensus AP-1 sites ( data not shown ) .
As shown in Fig .
6 , neither the « -Elf-1 , « -Jun family , nor « -fos family antiserum inhibited the binding of CREB/ATF proteins to the previously described ( 14 ) Tal site of the human T-cell receptor a enhancer .
Finally , we have shown that incubation of these antisera with in vitro-translated Elf-1 , c-Fos , and JunB proteins under conditions identical to those used in the EMSAs shown in Fig .
6 does not result in significant proteolytic cleavage of any of these proteins ( data not TRANSCRIPTIONAL ACTIVATION OF THE GM-CSF PROMOTER IN T CELLS 1157 shown ) .
Thus , the finding that these antisera quantitatively abolished the PB1-binding activity demonstrated that this complex contains Elf-1 or a highly related Ets family member and one or more AP-1 family members .
To more precisely determine which AP-1 family members were contained in the inducible PBl-binding complex , we used rabbit antisera specific for individual Jun and Fos proteins in EMSAs with the PBI oligonucleotide probe ( Fig .
6B ) .
Antisera specific for c-Fos and JunB both abolished most of the inducible PB1l-binding activity ( Fig .
6B , a « -c-fos and « -junB ) .
In contrast , antisera specific for Fra-1 and JunD ( Fig .
6C ) as well as control antisera against cardiac troponin C ( Fig .
6C , a « -cTnC ) , cyclin D1 ( Fig .
6B , « -D1 ) , c-Myc ( Fig .
6B , a-c-myc ) , and Ets-1 ( Fig .
6B , a « -ets-1 ) had little or no effect on this binding complex .
Taken together , these results suggested that the major inducible PB1-binding activity in activated T cells contains Elf-1 , c-Fos , and JunB .
However , because there was a small amount of residual binding activity that was not abolished by the a-c-Fos or « -JunB anti-serum , we can not rule out the possibility that there are less abundant complexes composed of Elf-1 and other AP-1 family members .
It should be emphasized that previous studies have demonstrated the specificity of the antisera used in these experiments ( 2 , 17 ) .
As shown in Fig .
6B , these antisera did not inhibit binding of CREB/ATF proteins to the control Tal oligonucleotide ( 14 ) from the human T-cell receptor a enhancer .
Thus , it is unlikely that the observed activities of these antisera resulted from cross-reactivity with other known Ets or AP-1 family members or from nonspecific effects on DNA binding .
However , we can not rule out the possibility of cross-reactivity with related but uncloned Ets or AP-1 transcription factors .
DISCUSSION The GM-CSF gene has been studied extensively as a model of inducible gene expression following T-cell activation .
Unlike the case for other lymphokine genes such as the IL-2 gene ( 1 , 8 , 10 ) or immediately-early genes such as c-myc ( 19 ) , which are regulated by complex multipartite promoters and enhancers , inducible GM-CSF gene expression is controlled by a relatively simple 57-bp element located immediately 5 ' of the transcriptional start site ( 29 ) .
Previous studies have identified a 19-bp motif within this region which binds a T-cell nuclear protein complex and which is required for the inducible expression of the intact 626-bp promoter in T cells ( 28 , 29 ) .
This motif is highly conserved in both the human and murine GM-CSF genes ( 24 , 28 ) .
In this report , we have demonstrated that this motif , which we have called PBI , binds an inducible complex from activated T-cell nuclear extracts and can function as an inducible transcriptional element in T cells when multimerized 5 ' of a heterologous promoter .
More importantly , we have shown that PBI is composed of adjacent Ets and AP-1 binding sites , both of which are required for binding of the inducible T-cell nuclear complex and for the inducible transcriptional activity of PB1 in activated T cells .
Both sites are also required for the inducible transcriptional activity of the intact GM-CSF promoter in T cells .
Using antibodies specific for individual Ets and AP-1 family members , we have shown that the major inducible PB1-binding activity present in activated T-cell nuclear extracts contains Elf-1 , c-Fos , and JunB .
Our results are in accord with the previous in vitro mutagenesis experiments of Nimer et al .
( 29 ) .
Although these previous studies did not identify the Ets and AP-1 binding sites , they did show that mutations or deletion of 1158 WANG ET AL .
A .
`` E E MS y a | 6 = / > a `` 45 e : ioo id $ $ 4 4 % 5 Antiserum : ' 83 ~ 5 Antiserum : ' 8 8 s s s s % 4 > .T had ah ts K6 : % Probe : - GM-CSF Tai GM-CSF a-c-myc Mor .
CELL .
BroL .
C. +A 2 w ( 3 ) ' e ' e o m -o § E o = £ a a & -E Cate P w 144909 gziigao Antiserum : « ++ 8 8 8 s s s 8 10 s s s s s 8 s d s= -m 2 ge - # Probe : GM-CSF Tal FIG .
6 .
The inducible PB1i-binding activity of T cells contains Elf-1 , c-Fos , and JunB .
( A ) Role of Elf-1 in the inducible PB1-binding activity of T cells .
Radiolabeled probes containing the PBI sequence from the murine GM-CSF promoter ( bp -33 to -58 ; see Fig .
1A ) or the control Tal sequence from the human T-cell receptor a enhancer ( 14 ) were used in EMSAs with nuclear extracts prepared from normal human T cells activated for 8 h with PMA plus ionomycin .
Where indicated , « -Elf-1 antiserum was added to the binding reaction mixtures .
The inducible PBl-binding activity is denoted by an arrow .
( B and C ) Role of AP-1 family members in the inducible PB1-binding activity of T cells .
EMSAs using the radiolabeled PB1 and Tal oligonucleotides and antisera that recognize all Jun ( « -jun Family ) or all Fos ( a-fos Family ) family members or specific Fos and Jun family members ( « -c-fos , a-fra-1 , « -junB , and « -junD ) were performed as described above .
The a-cyclin D1 ( « -D1 ) , a-c-Myc , o-Ets-1 , and a-cardiac troponin C ( « -cTnC ) antisera were used as negative controls .
The inducible PB1l-binding activity is denoted by an arrow .
PB1 nucleotides included in the Ets and AP-1 sites ( as identified in this study ) abolished inducible GM-CSF promoter activity whereas mutations or deletions not involving the Ets and AP-1 sites had no effect on the promoter in activated T cells .
Recent studies have suggested that adjacent Ets and AP-1 binding sites in the NFAT element of the IL-2 enhancer also play an important role in regulating inducible IL-2 gene expression following T-cell activation ( 2 , 15 ) .
However , there are several important differences in the structures and functions of the NFAT and PB1 elements .
First , the spacings of the Ets and AP-1 sites are different ( directly adjacent in PBI and separated by 3 bp in NFAT ; Fig .
1 ) .
Second , previous studies have demonstrated that the major NFAT-binding complex in activated human T-cell nuclear extracts contains Fra-l and JunB ( 2 ) , whereas the present study demonstrates that the major PB1-binding activity from these same cells contains c-Fos and JunB .
Of note , the two studies used identical antibody preparations , and therefore it is unlikely that differences in the antibody preparations could account for these results .
Finally , although we have shown in this study that an « -Elf-1 antiserum abolishes the major inducible PB1-binding activity from activated T-cell nuclear extracts , this same antiserum has no effect on the NFAT-binding complex from the same nuclear extracts ( data not shown ) .
Given these data , it seems likely that the NFAT element of the IL-2 promoter binds a nuclear protein complex which is distinct from that bound by the PB1 element of the GM-CSF promoter .
Confirmation of this model awaits the precise identification of the transcription factors that bind to the NFAT site .
The finding that the inducible T-cell PB1-binding activity is composed of both Ets and AP-1 family members suggests that multiple mechanisms may regulate the binding and transcriptional activity of this complex .
Thus , for example , previous studies have shown that both c-Fos and JunB are transcriptionally activated during T-cell activation ( 7 ) .
In addition , dephosphorylation of Jun family members may play an important role in their activation ( 3 ) .
Finally , we have recently shown that the transcriptional activity of Elf-1 activity is regulated by binding to and release from the retinoblastoma protein and that this binding reaction is itself regulated by activation-specific phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein following T-cell activation ( 32 ) .
These results are consistent with the observation that multiple signaling pathways are required to induce lymphokine gene expression in T cells ( 4 , 8 , 10 ) .
They also suggest that simple overexpression of a single Ets or AP-1 transcription factor will be insufficient to mimic the transcriptional effects of T-cell activation on GM-CSF promoter activity .
Similarly , it may be difficult to accurately reconstruct the inducible PB1-binding activity in vitro by using recombinant proteins .
Nevertheless , identification of the components of the inducible PB1l-binding activity and elucidation of the functionally important protein-protein interactions and posttranslational modifications of the complex members constitute an important first step in understanding the molecular mechanisms that regulate both gene expression and cell cycle progression following T-cell activation .
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Colette McNicholas-Serwecinski for her expert secretarial assistance .
This work was supported in part by Public Health Service grant Al-29673 ( to J. M. Leiden ) from the National Institutes of Health .
L. H. Boise is a fellow of the Leukemia Society of America .
Vor .
14 , 1994 ADDENDUM IN PROOF Since the submission of the manuscript , we have com pared the signalling requirements of the PBI and NFAT nuclear protein complexes .
Unlike NFAT , which requires stimulation with both PMA and ionomycin and is cyclosporin A sensitive , the PBI binding activity described in this report is induced by treatment of normal T cells with PMA alone and is resistant to treatment with cyclosporin A .
These differences in signalling requirements further suggest that NFAT and PBI are composed of distinct nuclear proteins .
10 .
11 .
12 .
13 .
14 .
15 .
16 .
17 .
REFERENCES .
Arya , S. K. 1988 .
Human and simian immunodeficiency retro- virus : activation and differential transactivation of gene expres-sion .
AIDS Res .
Hum .
Retroviruses 4:175-186. .
Boise , H. L. , B. Petryniak , X. Mao , C. H. June , C. Y. Wang , T. Lindsten , R. Bravo , K. Kovary , J. M. Leiden , and C. B. Thompson .
1993 .
The NFAT-1 DNA binding complex in activated T cells contains Fra-l and JunB .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
13:1911-1919. .
Boyle , W. J. , T. Smeal , L. H. K. Defize , P. Angel , J. R. Woodgett , M. Karin , and T. Hunter .
1991 .
Activation of protein kinase C decreases phosphorylation of c-jun at sites that negatively regulate its DNA-binding activity .
Cell 64:573-584. .
Cantrell , D. A. , and K. A. Smith .
1984 .
The interleukin-2 system : a new cell growth model .
Science 224:1312-1316. .
Chan , J. Y. , D. J. Slamon , S. D. Nimer , D. W. Golde , and J. C. Gasson .
1986 .
Regulation of expression of human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor ( GM-CSF ) .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 83:8669-8673. .
Clark , S. C. , and R. Kamen .
1987 .
The human hematopoietic colony-stimulating factors .
Science 236:1229-1237. .
Crabtree , G. R. 1989 .
Contingent genetic regulatory events in T lymphocyte activation .
Science 243:355-361. .
Durand , D. B. , J. P. Shaw , M. R. Bush , R. E. Replogle , R. Belagaje , and G. R. Crabtree .
1988 .
Characterization of antigen response elements within the interleukin-2 enhancer .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
8:1715-1724. .
Fleischmann , J. , D. W. Golde , R. H. Weisbart , and J. C. Gasson .
1986 .
Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor enhances phagocytosis of bacteria by human neutrophils .
Blood ©708-711 .
Fujita , T. , H. Shibuya , T. Ohashi , K. Yamanishi , and T. Taniguchi .
1986 .
Regulation of human interleukin-2 gene : functional DNA sequence in the 5 ' flanking region for the gene expression in activated T lymphocytes .
Cell 46:401-407 .
Gasson , J. C. 1991 .
Molecular physiology of granulocyte-mac-rophage-colony-stimulating factors .
Blood 77:1131-1145 .
Gasson , J. C. , R. H. Weisbart , S. E. Kaufman , S. C. Clark , R. M. Hewick , G. G. Wong , and D. W. Golde .
1984 .
Purified human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor : direct action on neutrophils .
Science 226:1339-1342 .
Grabstein , K. H. , D. L. Urdal , R. J. Tushinski , D. Y. Mochizuki , V. L. Price , M. A. Cantrell , S. Gillis , and P. J. Conlon .
1986 .
Introduction of macrophage tumoricidal activity by granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor .
Science 232:506-508 .
Ho , I.-C. , L.-H. Yang , G. Morle , and J. M. Leiden .
1989 .
A T-cell-specific transcription enhancer element 3 ' of Ca in the human T-cell receptor a locus .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 86:6714-6718 .
Jain , J. , P. G. McCaffrey , V. E. Valge-Archer , and A. Rao .
1992 .
Nuclear factor of activated T cells contains fos and jun .
Nature ( London ) 356:801-804 .
Kovary , K. , and R. Bravo .
1991 .
The Jun and Fos protein families are both required for cell cycle progression in fibro-blasts .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
11:4466-4472 .
Kovary , K. , and R. Bravo .
1992 .
Existence of different Jun and Fos proteins during G , -to-G , transition and during exponential growth in mouse fibroblasts : differential role of Fos proteins .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
12:5015-5023 .
TRANSCRIPTIONAL ACTIVATION OF THE GM-CSF PROMOTER IN T CELLS 18 .
19 .
21 .
22 .
24 .
26 .
27 .
29 .
30 .
31 .
32 .
33 .
34 .
35 .
1159 Leiden , J. M. , C. Y. Wang , B. Petryniak , D. M. Markovitz , G. J. Nabel , and C. B. Thompson .
1992 .
A novel Ets-related transcription factors , Elf-1 , binds to human immunodeficiency virus type 2 regulatory elements that are required for inducible trans activation in T cells .
J. Virol .
66:5890-5897 .
Lindsten , T. C. , C. H. June , and C. B. Thompson .
1988 .
Multiple mechanisms regulating c-myc gene expression during normal T-cell activation .
EMBO J .
7:2787-2794. .
Markovitz , D. M. , M. Hannibal , V. L. Perez , C. Gauntt , T. M. Folks , and G. J. Nabel .
1990 .
Differential regulation of human immunodeficiency virus ( HIVs ) : a specific regulatory element in HIV-2 responds to stimulation of the T-cell antigen receptor .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 87:9098-9102 .
Matsushime , H. , M. E. Ewen , D. K. Strom , J. Kato , S. K. Hanks , M. F. Roussel , and C. J. Sherr .
1992 .
Identification and properties of an atypical catalytic subunit ( p34 `` **/cdk4 ) for mammalian D type G1 cyclins .
Cell 71 ; 323-334 .
McCune , J. M. 1991 .
HIV-1 : the infective process in vivo .
Cell 64:351-363. .
Metcalf , D. 1985 .
The granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulat- ing factor .
Science 229:16-22 .
Miyatake , S. , T. Otsuka , F. Lee , and K. Arai .
1985 .
Structure of the chromosomal gene for granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor : comparison of the mouse and human genes .
EMBO J .
4:2561-2568. .
Miyatake , S. , J. Shlomai , K. Arai , and N. Arai .
1991 .
Charac- terization of mouse granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor ( GM-CSF ) gene promoter : nuclear factors that interact with an element shared by three lymphokine genes-those for GM-CSF , interleukin-4 ( IL-4 ) , and IL-5 .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
11 : 5894-5901 .
Nabel , G. , and D. Baltimore .
1987 .
A inducible transcription factor activates expression of human immunodeficiency virus in T cells .
Nature ( London ) 326:711-713 .
Niemeyer , C. M. , C. A. Sieff , B. Mathey-Prevot , J .
Z. Wimperis , B. E. Bierer , S. C. Clark , and D. G. Nathan .
1989 .
Expression of human interleukin-3 ( multi-CSF ) is restricted to human lymphocytes and T cell tumor cell lines .
Blood 73:945-961. .
Nimer , S. , D. A. Elaine , E. A. Morita , M. J. Martis , and W. Wachsman .
1988 .
Characterization of the human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor region by genetic analy-sis : correlation with DNase I footprinting .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
8:1979-1984 .
Nimer , S. , J. Farser , J. Richards , M. Lynch , and J. Gasson .
1990 .
The repeat sequence CATT ( A/T ) is required for granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor promoter activity .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
10:6084-6088 .
Shomaker , S. G. , R. Hromas , and K. Kaushansky , .
1990 .
Transcriptional regulation of interleukin-3 gene expression in T lymphocytes .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 87:9650-9654 .
Thompson , C. B. , C. Y. Wang , I. Ho , P. R. Bohjanen , B. Petryniak , C. H. June , S. Miesfeldt , L. Zhang , G. J. Nabel , B. Karpinski , and J. M. Leiden .
1992. cis-acting sequences required for inducible interleukin-2 enhancer function bind a novel Ets-related protein , Elf-1 .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
12:1043-1053 .
Wang , C. Y. , C. B. Thompson , B. Petriniak , W. G. Kaelin , and J. M. Leiden .
1993 .
Regulation of an Ets-related transcription factor , Elf-1 , by binding to the retinblastoma protein .
Science 260:1330-1335 .
Weisbart , R. H. , D. W. Golde , S. C. Clark , G. G. Wong , and J. C. Gasson .
1985 .
Human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor is a neutrophil activator .
Nature ( London ) 314:361-363 .
Weisbart , R. H. , L. Kwan , D. W. Golde , and J. C. Gasson .
1987 .
Human GM-CSF primes neutrophils for enhanced oxidative metabolism in response to the major physiological chemoattrac-tants .
Blood 69:18-21 .
Wong , G. G. , J. S. Witek , P. A. Temple , K. M. Wilkens , D. P. Luxenberg , S. S. Jones , E. L. Brown , R. M. Kay , E. C. Orr , C. Shoemaker , D. W. Golde , R. J. Kaufman , R. M. Hewick , E. A. Wang , and S. C. Clark .
1985 .
Human GM-CSF : molecular cloning of the complementary DNA and purification of the natural and recombinant proteins .
Science 228:810-815 .
