Brief Definitive Report Functional Myc-Max Heterodimer Is Required for Activation-induced Apoptosis in T Cell Hybridomas By Reid P. Bissonnette , `` Anne Artin Mahboubi® , and Douglas R. Green* From the La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology , La Jolla , California 92037 ; and the Cell Biology Laboratory , Department of Biology , St. Patrick 's College , Maynooth , Ireland Summary T cell hybridomas respond to activation signals by undergoing apoptotic cell death , and this is likely to represent comparable events related to tolerance induction in immature and mature T cells in vivo .
Previous studies using antisense oligonucleotides implicated the c-Myc protein in the phenomenon of activation-induced apoptosis .
This role for c-Myc in apoptosis is now confirmed in studies using a dominant negative form of its heterodimeric binding partner , Max , which we show here inhibits activation-induced apoptosis .
Further , coexpression of a reciprocally mutant Myc protein capable of forming functional heterodimers with the mutant Max can compensate for the dominant negative activity and restore activation-induced apoptosis .
These results imply that Myc promotes activation-induced apoptosis by obligatory heterodimerization with Max , and therefore , by regulating gene transcription .
igation of the CD3 TCR complex on mature and immature T lymphocytes induces extensive gene expression , including the early induction of c-myc .
In immature T cells and T cell hybridomas this activation also leads to apoptotic cell death in a manner which is dependent upon macro-molecular synthesis ( 1-4 ) .
Previously , we used antisense oligodeoxynucleotides to inhibit the expression of c-Myc in activated T hybridoma cells .
This treatment leads to a rapid loss of c-Myc protein and we found that this blocked activation-induced apoptosis ( 5 ) .
This and other studies ( 6-9 ) have implicated c-Myc in some forms of apoptosis .
Thus , in addition to promoting cell entry and passage through the cell cycle , c-Myc functions to direct cells into an apoptotic pathway .
The outcome of c-Myc activation is likely to depend upon other signals , such as those provided by growth factors ( 7 , 8 ) or by other oncogenes ( 6 , 10-12 ) .
Myc is known to associate with several proteins within the cell , including the retinoblastoma protein ( 13 ) , TFII-I ( 14 ) , and Max ( 15 , 16 ) .
This last protein forms a heterodimer with Myc which regulates gene transcription by binding to specific DNA sequences ( 17-20 ) .
We therefore sought to determine whether the role of c-Myc in activation-induced apoptosis was related to the functional activity of the Myc-Max heterodimer in control of gene expression .
To investigate this , we have used dominant negative mutants of c-Myc and Max which have been demonstrated to block transcriptional regulation and transformation by c-Myc .
Materials and Methods Plasmids , Cell Culture , and Transfections .
The A1.1 T cell hybridoma has been previously described .
Cells were maintained in IMDM supplemented with 5 % FCS , 5 x 10-5 M B-mercapto-ethanol , and 2 mM glutamine .
The cells were transfected by elec-troporation using a capacitor-discharge pulse generator ( GenePulser ; Bio-Rad Laboratories , Richmond , CA ) .
The cells were harvested from log phase cultures , suspended in the original conditioned medium at 10 x 105/ml and 0.8 ml cell suspension incubated for 15 min on ice in the presence of 20 pug linearized plasmid .
The suspensions were pulsed once with 250 V at 960-uF capacitance in a 0.4-mm gap cuvette , and pulsed cells were incubated a further 15 min on ice , after which they were placed in 10 ml of fresh media .
Transfected cell cultures were incubated for 24 h , washed , and then resuspended in fresh media .
They were incubated an additional 10-14 d in the presence of selection media , containing either 800 pg/val G418 ( GIBCO BRL , Gaithersburg , MD ) or 500 ug/ml hygromycin B ( Sigma Chemical Co. , St. Louis , MO ) .
These bulk transfectants were reselected an additional 10 d in G418 or hygromycin before being used in the experiments described .
Alternatively , individual clones were isolated by limiting dilution growth in the presence of selection antibiotics .
The clones were screened for gene expression by reverse transcriptase-PCR ( cDNA cycle ; In-vitrogen , San Diego , CA ) using species- and construct-specific primers .
All of the expression vectors containing the reciprocal exchange mutants or wild-type mye and max genes used in this study were constructed and described by Amati et al .
( 21 ) .
Briefly , the myc exchange mutant ( mycRX ) was constructed by replacing the helix-loop-helix leucine zipper ( HLH/LZ ) domain of c-Myc with the complementary domain from max .
Both c-mye and mycRX were placed in a G418-selectable retroviral vector .
The max exchange mutant ( maxRX ) and wild-type max were placed in a similar but hygromycin-selectable retroviral vector .
All plasmids were generously provided by Dr. Bruno Amati ( Imperial Cancer Research Fund , London , UK ) .
All plasmids were linearized before transfections .
Induction and Analysis of Apoptosis .
- For the induction of apop- 2413 J. Exp .
Med .
© The Rockefeller University Press « 0022-1007/94/12/2413/06 $ 2.00 Volume 180 December 1994 2413-2418 tosis , the A1.1 T hybridoma cells were cultured for 16 h in plates precoated with the monoclonal anti-CD3¢ antibody 145.2C11 ( 22 ) as previously described ( 2 ) .
For direct staining with propidium iodide ( PI ) to assess viability , the contents of each of triplicate culture wells were washed , resuspended in PBS containing 5 ug/ml PI , and analyzed immediately using a FACScan® ( log scale ) ( Becton Dickinson & Co. , Mountain View , CA ) .
Dead cells were identified as those taking up the dye .
For analysis by DNA content , the cells were washed once in PBS/5 mM EDTA and then fixed in 70 % ethanol for 30 min at room temperature .
The fixed cells were washed once in PBS and resuspended in PBS containing 100 ug/ml RNase A/200 U/ml RNase T1 .
The cells were incubated 15-30 min at room temperature , after which they were stained by adding 1 vol PBS containing 100 ug/ml PI .
The cells were analyzed by FACScan® ( linear scale ) ( Becton Dickinson & Co. ) .
Apoptotic cells were identified by having less than 2 n DNA content ( i.e .
, sub-diploid ) .
Cells were assessed for DNA fragmentation in situ using a terminal deoxytransferase ( TdT ) -based nick end labeling assay which detects DNA strand breaks by using TIT to incorporate biotin-labeled UTP , which is subsequently detected by the addition of avidin-FITC ( 23 ) .
The cells were fixed in 1 % formaldehyde/PB $ S , and stored in 70 % ethanol .
For UTP-biotin incorporation , the cells were resuspended in TIT buffer ( 0.2 M potassium cacodylate , 25 mM Tris-HCl , pH 6.6 , 2.5 mM cobalt chloride , 0.25 mg/ml BSA , 100 U/ml TIT and 0.5 nM biotin-16-dUTP ) and incubated for 30 min at 37°C .
The cells were washed in PBS and resuspended in citrate/FITC-avidin buffer ( 0.6 M NaCl , 0.06 M NaCitrate , 2.5 mg/ml fluoresceinated avidin , 0.1 % Triton X-100 , 5 % ( wt/vol ) nonfat dry milk ) .
The cells were either analyzed immediately or fixed in PBS/1 % formaldehyde for later analysis .
All FACS® data analysis was performed using LYSYS II software .
For the quantitation of apoptosis by acridine orange/ethidium bromide , cells were collected from cultures stimulated with anti-CD3 and 100 ul cell suspension immediately stained with 4 ul of a cocktail of 100 ug/ml acridine orange and 100 ug/ml ethidium bromide in PBS .
Cells were scored as apoptotic/nonapoptotic by UV light microscopy .
Detection of Lymphokine Production .
- IL 2 production was determined by [ °H ] JTIR uptake of the IL-2-responsive cell line CTL L ( 24 ) and quantitated using a recombinant IL-2 standard .
Mye J ~ Te __ ] Myc E [ 6 ] I sia Cis oce ] -/ Results and Discussion The strategy we used is illustrated in Fig .
1 .
A protein composed of Max with the HLH-LZ of Myc ( MaxRX ) forms a nonfunctional dimer with endogenous Max in the cell ( 21 ) .
This MaxRX-Max dimer acts as an inhibitor of normal Myc-Max heterodimer function in two ways : not only does MaxRX bind to and titrate out wild-type Max , the transcriptionally inactive Max-MaxRX dimer can bind to DNA and prevent binding of wild-type Myc-Max dimers ( 21 ) .
A reciprocal mutation in Myc , i.e .
, MycRX , exchanges the HLH-LZ of Myc for that of Max .
However , this molecule might have only limited inhibitory activity , since although MycRX can bind efficiently to wild-type Myc , the MycRX-Myc dimer is not predicted to bind efficiently to DNA ( 21 ) .
However , when both the inhibitory MaxRX and the MycRX proteins are present , these will form a MycRX-MaxRX heterodimer that is functional .
Studies by Amati et al .
( 21 ) , upon which this strategy is based , showed that MycRX and MaxRX are both required for fibroblast transformation , neither one having transforming effects on its own .
Constructs encoding the mutant MaxRX protein were transfected into A1.1 T hybridoma cells and clones with stable expression were selected .
Cells were then examined for their ability to undergo activation-induced apoptosis upon exposure to anti-CD3 antibody .
As shown in the four experiments in Fig .
2 , expression of MaxRX significantly inhibited anti-CD3-induced apoptosis , as determined by three different methods .
In the first , cells were activated overnight and then stained with propidium iodide ( without fixation ) and analyzed by FACS® ( Fig .
2 A ) .
This simple method gives an accurate assessment of cell viability ( since dead cells take up the dye [ 25 ] ) but does not discriminate between apoptosis and necrosis .
Alternatively , cells were activated , fixed , and stained with propidium iodide to examine DNA content .
When analyzed by FACS® , apoptotic cells appear as a sub Figure 1 .
Schematic representation of the Myc/Max heterodimerization domain ( HLH-LZ ) exchange mutants used in this study and their relationships .
Myc and Max form transcriptionally active heterodimers through the interaction of HLH-LZ motifs .
MycRX ( 21 ) was generated by reciprocally exchanging the HLH-LZ domain of wild-type Myc with that of wild-type Max Strong heterodimer formation , binds DNA : ACTIVE Max [ [ ef nouiz | ___// ) DOMINANT SUPPRESSOR ( RX for reciprocal exchange , Amati et ' -- Max l Hl II L7 H ] Strong heterodimer formation , I 21 R 1 d , “ HM “ : J binds DNA : INACTIVE al .
[ 21 ] ) .
MaxRX ( 21 ) was engineere Maxkx [ [ ef nouiz | ___ } / ) ( titrates out Max , blocks binding of by exchanging the HLH-LZ of wild myeC ) / -- - poo MyeRXC ) ao ] mex C/- fons ] -- > MyeRX [ 7 [ EJ coz ] Marx |___// 2414 MaxRX [ [ b ] I , `` | 3M active dimers to DNA ) type Max with that from Myc .
The diagram shows the interaction of these two exchange mutants , together with mye CJ /- -- - { Poole tormcuon , _ their interactions with the wild-type MyeRXL ; / [ ef urz ] _| ] does not bind DNA : INACTIVE proteins .
MycRX forms dimers with ( titrates out Myc ) both MaxRX and with wild-type Myc ; however , only MycRX-MaxRX dimers can bind DNA and are transcriptionally active .
MaxRX can form dimers with MycRX or with wild-type Max .
Either dimer may bind DNA , but only the MycRX-MaxRX dimer is active .
COMPLEMENTATION Strong heterodimer formation , bindS DNA : ACTIVE Functional Myc-Max Heterodimer and Apoptosis in T Cell Hybridomas A % Apoptosis 112 0 20 4 __ P All 1242 Al.1 Al.1.pBABE A1l.1 pBabe 11.84 Al.1 .
maxRx 16.14 Al.l.maxRxmycRx 17.78 Pa O 0 -- % subdiploid cells +3 A -- % dead cells ( triplicates , PI uptake ) 5 a -- mean % apoptotic cells ( with std .
= j—l dev ) - =- 3 | Al.. A11 .
mycRXmaxRX Figure 2 .
Inhibition of activation-induced cell death by the stable expression of MaxRX .
( A ) Percentage of apoptotic cells after stimulation with monoclonal antibody ( 2 ) measured by PI staining of unfixed cells ( A ) , or by fixation and staining with PI for assessment of DNA content ( O { ] ) .
Included is a determination of IL-2 produced after stimulation in one of the experiments ( O ) .
( B ) Determination of DNA fragmentation by FACS® analysis of cells labeled in situ with terminal deoxytransferase and UTP-biotin/avidin FITC after stimulation with anti-CD3 .
A1.1 maxRX transfectants were induced to undergo apoptosis by overnight culture in anti-CD3 coated plates .
Data shown for cell death as determined by direct staining of unfixed cells ( A ) with PI represents the mean of triplicate cultures with standard deviation .
Bars represent the mean apoptosis of three experiments , with standard deviation .
diploid population , owing to the fragmentation and subsequent loss of the soluble DNA fragments ( Fig .
2 A ) ( 26 ) .
Finally , cells were analyzed using an in situ terminal deoxytransferase reaction to label 3'-OH ends in the DNA , a method that detects apoptosis involving DNA fragmentation ( 23 ) .
As shown in Fig .
2 B , a pronounced apoptotic peak was observed after activation of control cells , but not cells expressing MaxRX .
This effect of MaxRX was not observed in the presence of MycRX .
Our previous studies using c-myc antisense oligodeoxynucleotides indicated that inhibition of Myc expression in T hybridoma cells prevented activation-induced apoptosis but not activation-induced cytokine production ( 5 ) .
We therefore examined cytokine production in the cells expressing MaxRX .
As shown in Fig .
2 A , cells expressing MaxRX produced a level of cytokine after activation that was equivalent to that of the other cells , despite significantly less activation-induced apoptosis .
Thus , the function of the Myc-Max heterodimer appears not to be important to the expression of IL-2 after activation .
Analysis of the 5 flanking region of the IL-2 gene 2,300 bases upstream of the ATG start codon indicates the absence of a CACGTG consensus Myc-Max binding site .
The use of cloned cell lines generated after transfection and selection carries the potential problem that any clone might gain or lose a function due to random factors not related to the transfected gene .
An alternative approach is to examine the effects of expression of these proteins in bulk .
Thus , cells were transfected and selected , and their response to activation was examined without cloning .
Results from several bulk transfections are shown in Fig .
3 .
Again , we observed that 2415 Bissonnette et al .
Log Fluorescence ( FITC ) expression of MaxRX inhibited activation-induced apoptosis while coexpression of both MaxRX and MycRX did not .
The effects of MycRX were inconsistent , but generally this molecule did not appear to significantly inhibit the induction of apoptosis .
In one experiment we examined IL-2 produc-tion , and found equivalent levels of cytokine produced by cells expressing MaxRX , MycRX-MaxRX , and the control vectors , as above ( results not shown ) .
These results support those obtained using cloned cells above , and together , these demonstrate that in addition to Myc , the function of Max is required for activation-induced apoptosis .
The ability of MycRX to block the inhibitory effects of MaxRX strongly suggests that Myc and Max function as a heterodimer in activation-induced apoptosis .
In these experiments we also examined possible effects of wild-type Max on activation-induced apoptosis in bulk transfected T hybridoma cells .
Max is known to form homodimers ( 17 , 18 , 27 , 28 ) and can inhibit the effects of the Myc-Max heterodimer in vivo ( 17 , 20 , 21 , 29-31 ) .
As shown in Fig .
3 , wild-type Max similarly inhibited activation-induced apoptosis .
Thus , susceptibility to activation-induced apoptosis can apparently be regulated by the levels of Max in the cell , and this might therefore represent a potential control mechanism .
Similarly , other proteins that influence the availability of Max ( e.g .
, Mad [ 32 ] ) might have roles in regulating activation-induced apoptosis .
In a number of cell types , Myc expression can trigger apoptosis ( 6-9 ) which is inhibited by growth factors ( 7 , 8 ) or by the Bcl-2 protein ( 10-12 ) .
Most of these studies have involved the use of transfected cell lines .
Recently , these observations were extended to group I Burkitt lymphoma cells which dis Brief Definitive Report % Apoptosis 0 20 40 60 All Al.1.pDor Al.1.pBabe Al.l.max Al.l.maxRX Al.l.mycRX A1.1.mycRXmaxRX A HA A 0 - @ - -- % apoptotic cells ( triplicates , acridine orange/ethidium bromide ) -- % subdiploid cells -- mean % apoptotic cells ( with std .
dev . )
play a high incidence of apoptosis in vitro and in vivo .
Inhibition of c-Myc expression by IFN- or c-myc antisense oligodeoxynucleotides protected these cells from apoptosis ( 33 ) .
Thus , c-Myc plays roles in apoptosis under a variety of conditions .
Amati et al .
( 34 ) have provided evidence that Myc-induced apoptosis in fibroblasts depends upon the interaction of Myc and Max .
They used constructs encoding mutant proteins in which the residues forming electrostatic interactions within the leucine zipper heterodimerization motif were reciprocally exchanged .
Thus , the resulting MycEG protein does not bind to Max , but does bind to a reciprocally modified MaxEG protein .
When both are introduced into fibroblasts , the cells became highly susceptible to apoptosis .
Thus , Myc induces apoptosis via interaction with Max .
Our observations on activation-induced apoptosis are completely consistent with these findings .
In contrast to the systems described here , apoptosis may occur due to a decrease in Myc expression in some cases .
Thulasi et al .
( 35 ) noted that glucocorticoids inhibit Myc expression in cells in which they induce apoptosis , and constitutive expression of Myc appears to protect these cells .
Further , in a system partially related to the one described here , activation of the WEHI-231 B cell line via ligation of surface immunoglobulin induces apoptosis and a decrease in Myc ex Figure 3 .
- Inhibition of activation-induced apoptosis in bulk ( un-cloned ) transfected cells expressing Myc and Max exchange mutants .
Percent cells undergoing apoptosis after stimulation with monoclonal antibody to the TCR-CD3 complex as determined by FACS® analysis of DNA content in cells fixed and stained with PI ( OAQ ) , or by assessment of morphology and viability of cells in triplicate cultures stained with acridine orange/ethidium bromide , with standard deviation ( @ ) ( 40 ) .
Bars represent the mean apoptosis of four experiments , with standard deviation .
The induction and assessment of apoptosis by DNA content was as for Fig .
2 A .
For the quantitation of apoptosis by acridine orange/ethidium bromide , cells were collected from cultures stimulated with anti-CD3 and immediately stained and scored by UV light microscopy .
Data shown represents the mean of triplicate cultures with standard deviation .
pression ( 36 ) .
Interestingly , c-myc-antisense oligonucleotides were observed to stabilize expression of Myc in the activated B lymphomas and thereby prevent apoptosis .
In support of this contrasting role for Myc as an apparent survival signal in the transformed B cells , lines that resist activation-induced apoptosis fail to downregulate Myc upon activation ( 37 ) .
Thus , Myc appears to have strikingly different roles in the induction versus prevention of apoptosis in different systems .
The Myc-Max heterodimer functions as a transcriptional regulator to induce gene expression .
Our results and those of Amati et al .
( 34 ) in which Myc-Max promotes apoptosis therefore suggest that further transcription is required for cell death , and thus Myc-Max-induced genes should be examined for their potential roles in inducing apoptosis .
One gene that is known to be induced by Myc is ornithine decar-boxylase ( ODC ) ( 38 ) .
Recently , Packham and Cleveland examined the role of ODC in 32D cells , in which c-Myc expression promotes IL-3 withdrawal-induced apoptosis .
They found that expression of the ODC gene from a constitutive promoter rendered 32D cells susceptible to apoptosis in the absence of exogenous Myc ( 39 ) .
Further , they found that phar-macologic inhibition of ODC activity in Myc-expressing cells reduced their susceptibility to apoptosis induction .
Thus , at least one Myc-induced gene has been implicated in one form of apoptosis .
The authors would like to thank Dr. Bruno Amati for providing valuable reagents and Dr. Don New meyer for valuable discussions .
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health ( GM-52735 ) and by the American Cancer Society ( CB-82 ) .
2416 Functional Myc-Max Heterodimer and Apoptosis in T Cell Hybridomas Address correspondence to Reid P. Bissonnette , Ligand Pharmaceuticals , 9393 Towne Center Drive , San Diego , CA 92121 , which is his current address .
Received for publication 22 June 1994 .
References 1 .
5 .
10 .
11 .
12 .
13 .
14 .
15 .
16 .
Cohen , J.J. , and R.C .
Duke .
1984 .
Glucocorticoid activation of a calcium-dependent endonuclease in thymocyte nuclei leads to cell death .
J. Immunol .
132:38. .
Shi , Y. , M.G .
Szalay , L. Paskar , M. Boyer , B. Singh , and D.R .
Green .
1990 .
Activation induced cell death in T cell hybridomas is due to apoptosis : morphological aspects and DNA fragmentation .
J. Immunol .
144:3326. .
Odaka , C. , H. Kizaki , and T. Tadakuma .
1990 .
T cell receptor mediated DNA fragmentation and cell death in T cell hybridomas .
J. Immunol .
144:2096. .
Ucket , D.S .
, J.D .
Ashwell , and G. Nickas .
1989 .
Activation driven T cell death .
I .
Requirements for de novo transcription and translation and association with genome fragmentation .
J. Immunol .
143:3461 .
Shi , Y. , J.M .
Glynn , LJ .
Guilbert , T.G .
Cotter , R.P .
Bissonnette , and D.R .
Green .
1992 .
Role for c-myc in activation-induced apoptotic cell death in T cell hybridomas .
Science ( Wash. DC ) .
257:212. .
Wyllie , A.H. , K.A .
Rose , R.G .
Morris , C.M .
Steel , E. For ster , and D. A. Spandidos .
1987 .
Rodent fibroblast tumors expressing human myc and ras genes : growth , metastasis and endogenous oncogene expression .
Br .
J .
Cancer 56:251. .
Askew , D.S .
, R.A. Ashmun , B.C .
Simmons , and J.L .
Cleve- land .
1991 .
Constitutive c-myc expression in an II > 3-dependent myeloid cell line suppresses cell cycle arrest and accelerates apoptosis .
Oncogene .
6:1915. .
Evan , G.I .
, A.H. Wyllie , C.S .
Gilbert , TD .
Littlewood , H. Land , M. Brooks , C.M .
Waters , L.Z .
Penn , and D.C. Han-cock .
1992 .
Induction of apoptosis in fibroblasts by c-myc protein .
Cell .
69:119. .
Bissonnette , R.P .
, Y. Shi , A. Mahboubi , J.M .
Glynn , and D.R .
Green .
1994 .
C-myc and apoptosis .
In Apoptosis II : The Molecular Basis of Cell Death .
L.D .
Tomei and FO .
Cope , editors .
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , Cold Spring Harbor , NY .
327-356 .
Bissonnette , RP .
, F. Echeverri , A. Mahboubi , and D.R .
Green .
1992 .
Apoptotic cell death induced by c-myc is inhibited by bel-2 .
Nature ( Lond . )
.
359:552 .
Fanidi , A. , E.A .
Harrington , and G.I .
Evan .
1992 .
Cooperative interaction between c-myc and bel-2 proto-oncogenes .
Nature ( Lond . )
.
359:554 .
Wagner , A.J .
, M.B .
Small , and N. Hay .
1993 .
Mye-mediated apoptosis is blocked by ectopic expression of Bcl-2 .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
13:2432 .
Rustgi , A.K .
, N. Dyson , and R. Bernards .
1991 .
Amino-terminal domains of c-myc and N-myc proteins mediate binding to the retinoblastoma gene product .
Nature ( Lond . )
.
352:541 .
Roy , A.L .
, C. Carruthers , T. Gutjaht , and R.G .
Roeder .
1993 .
Direct role for myc in transcription initiation mediated by interactions with TFII-I .
Nature ( Lond . )
.
35:359 .
Blackwood , E.M. , and R.N .
Eisenman .
1991 .
Max : a helix-loop-helix zipper protein that forms a sequence-specific DNA-binding complex with Myc .
Science ( Wash. DC ) .
2511211 .
Blackwood , E.M. , B. Luscher , and R.N .
Eisenman .
1992 .
Myc and Max associate in vivo .
Genes & Dev .
6:71 .
2417 Bissonnette et al .
17 .
18 .
19 .
20 .
21 .
22 .
23 .
24 .
25 .
26 .
27 .
28 .
29 .
30 .
31 .
32 .
33 .
Amati , B. , S. Dalton , MW .
Brooks , TD .
Littlewood , G.I .
Evan , and H. Land .
1992 .
Transcriptional activation by the human c-Myc oncoprotein in yeast requires interaction with Max .
Nature ( Lond . )
.
359:423 .
Littlewood , T.D .
, B. Amati , H. Land , and G.I .
Evan .
1992 .
Max and c-Myc/Max DNA binding activities in cell extracts .
Oncogene .
7:1783 .
Fisher , F. , D.H. Crouch , P.-S. Jayaraman , W. Clark , D.A.F .
Gillespie , and C.R .
Gooding .
1993 .
Transcription activation by Myc and Max : flanking sequences target activation to a subset of CACGTG motifs in vivo .
EMBO ( Eur Mol .
Biol .
Organ . )
J .
12:5075 .
Amin , C. , A.J .
Wagner , and N. Hay .
1993 .
Sequence-specific transcriptional activation by Myc and repression by Max .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
13:383 .
Amati , B. , M.W .
Brooks , N. Levy , T.D .
Littlewood , G.I .
Evan , and H. Land .
1993 .
Oncogenic activity of the c-Myc protein requires dimerization with Max .
Cell .
72:233 .
Leo , O. , M. Foo , D.H. Sachs , L.E .
Samelson , and J .
A. Blue-stone .
1987 .
Identification of a monoclonal antibody specific for a murine T3 polypeptide .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA .
84:1374 .
Gorezyca , W. , S. Bruno , R.J. Darzynkiewicz , J. Gong , and Z. Darzynkiewicz .
1992 .
DNA strand breaks during apoptosis : their early in situ detection by the terminal deox-ynucleotidy ] l transferase and nick translation assays and prevention by serine protease inhibitors .
Int .
J. Oncol .
1:639 .
Gillis , S. , M.M .
Ferm , W. Ou , and K.A .
Smith .
1978 .
T cell growth factor : parameters of production and a quantitative microassay for activity .
J. Immunol .
120:2027 .
DelBino , G. , P. Lassota , and Z. Darzynkiewicz .
1991 .
The S-phase cytotoxicity of camptothecin .
Exp Cell Res .
193:27 .
Darzynkiewicz , Z. , S. Bruno , G. DelBino , W. Gorezyca , M.A .
Hotz , P. Lassota , and F. Traganos .
1992 .
Features of apoptotic cells measured by flow cytometry .
Cytometry .
13:795 .
Berberich , S. , and M.D .
Cole .
1992 .
Casein kinase II inhibits the DNA-binding activity of Max homodimers but not Myc/Max heterodimers .
Genes & Dev .
6:166 .
Kato , G.J .
, W.M.F .
Lee , L. Chen , and CV .
Dang .
1992 .
Max : functional domains and interaction with c-Myc .
Genes & Dev .
6:81-92 .
Kretzner , L. , EM .
Blackwood , and R.N .
Eisenman .
1992 .
Myc and Max proteins possess distinct transcriptional activi-ties .
Nature ( Lond . )
.
359:426 .
Makela , TP .
, PJ .
Koskinen , L. Vastrik , and K. Alitalo .
1992 .
Alternative forms of Max as enhancers or suppressors of Myc-Ras cotransformation .
Science ( Wash. DC ) .
256:373 .
Mukherjee , B. , SD .
Morgenbesse , and R.A. DePinho .
1992 .
Myc family oncoproteins function through a common pathway to transform normal cells in culture : cross-interference by Max and trans-acting dominant mutants .
Genes & Dev .
6:1480 .
Ayer , D.E .
, L. Kretzner , and R.N .
Eisenman .
1993 .
Mad : a heterodimeric partner for Max that antagonizes Myc transcriptional activity .
Cell .
72:211 .
Milner , A.E , , R.J. Grand , C.M .
Waters , and C.D .
Gregory .
Brief Definitive Report 34 .
35 .
36 .
1993 .
Apoptosis in Burkitt lymphoma cells is driven by c-myc .
Oncogene .
8:3385 .
Amati , B. , T.D .
Littlewood , G.I .
Evan , and H. Land .
1993 .
The c-Myc protein induces cell cycle progression and apoptosis through dimerization with Max .
EMBO ( Eur .
Mol .
Biol .
Organ . )
J .
12:5083 .
Thulasi , R. , DV .
Harbour , and E.B .
Thompson .
1993 .
Suppression of c-myc is a critical step in glucocorticoid-induced human leukemic cell lysis .
J. Biol .
Chem .
268:18306 .
Fischer , G. , SC .
Kent , L. Joseph , D.R .
Green , and D.W. Scott .
1994 .
Lymphoma models for B cell activation and tolerance .
X. Anti-u-mediated growth arrest and apoptosis of murine B cell lymphomas is prevented by the stabilization of myc .
J. Exp .
Med , 179:221 .
2418 37 .
38 .
39 .
Hibner , U. , L.E .
Benhamou , M. Haury , P.-A .
Cazenave , and P. Sarthou .
1993 .
Signaling of programmed cell death induction in WEHI-231 B lymphoma cells .
Eur J. Immunol .
23:2821 .
Wagner , A.J .
, C. Meyers , L.A. Laimins , and N. Hay .
1994. c-Myc induces the expression and activity of ornithine decar-boxylase .
Cell Growth & Differ 11:879 .
Packham , G. , and J.L .
Cleveland .
1994 .
Ornithine decarbox-ylase is a mediator of c-Myc induced apoptosis .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
14:5741. .
Mishell , B.B .
, et al .
1980 .
Preparation of mouse cell suspen- sions .
In Selected Methods in Cellular Immunology .
BB .
Mishell , and S.M .
Shiigi , editors .
W.H .
Freeman , New York .
21-22 .
Functional Myc-Max Heterodimer and Apoptosis in T Cell Hybridomas
