Vol .
5 , 1195-1203 , November 1994 Cell Growth & Differentiation Overexpression of Protein Kinase C- { Stimulates Leukemic Cell Differentiation D. Kirk Ways , `` Karla Posekany , James deVente , Trudy Garris , Jianming Chen , Jerry Hooker , Weixi Qin , Paul Cook , Donald Fletcher , and Peter Parker Departments of Medicine [ D. K. W. , T. G. , J. C. , J. H. , W. Q. , P. C.J , Anatomy/Cell Biology , [ D. F. ] , and Microbiology/Immunology { K. P. , J. d. } , East Carolina University School of Medicine , Greenville , North Carolina 27858-4354 , and Imperial Cancer Research Fund Protein Phosphorylation Laboratory , London , United Kingdom [ P. P. ] Abstract A function for protein kinase C- { ( PKC- ) , a member of the phorbol ester nonresponsive atypical protein kinase C subfamily , in modulating differentiation was examined in the leukemic U937 cell .
Transfected U937 cells stably overexpressing PKC-£ displayed a longer doubling time , lower saturation density at confluency , and an increase in adherence to plastic as compared to control cells .
PKC-£ cells expressed a more differentiated phenotype as assessed by changes in morphology , surface antigen expression , and lysosomal enzyme activities and were distinct from parental U937 cells stimulated to differentiate by exposure to phorbol esters .
In contrast to parental U937 cells , PKC-£ cells constitutively expressed mRNA transcripts for c-jun and a low mobility AP-1 binding activity .
Thus , PKC-C overexpression stimulates a type of phenotypic differentiation that differs significantly from maturation occurring upon activation of other PKC subfamilies induced by phorbol ester treatment .
Increased expression of the c-jun proto-oncogene and an increase in AP-1 binding activity in PKC-£ cells provides a potential mechanism for explaining the altered differentiation status of this cell .
Introduction Phorbol esters have divergent , cell-specific effects on growth and differentiation .
These compounds exert their effects by activating PKC.3 One potential mechanism explaining these divergent effects is the existence of a PKC gene family ( 1-3 ) .
The PKC gene family is comprised of at least 10 genes that are divided into three subfamilies : cal-cium-dependent or conventional ( « « , B , , B , , , and y ) ; calcium-independent or novel ( e , 8 , 7 , and 0 ) ; and atypical PKCs ( £ , A , and i ) .
These isoforms differ in their substrate specificity , subcellular and cellular distribution , and susceptibility to proteolytic degradation following activation .
Differences between the PKC subfamilies are thought to be , in part , Received 6/3/94 ; revised 8/5/94 ; accepted 8/29/94 .
`` This work was supported by NIH Grant CA43023 and a Senior International Fogarty Fellowship .
2 To whom requests for reprints should be addressed .
* The abbreviations used are : PKC , protein kinase C ; AP-1 , activator pro-tein-1 ; TPA , tetradecanoylphorbol-1 3-acetate ; PBS , phosphate-buffered sa-line ; MBP , _ ; , , myelin basic protein peptide corresponding to residues 4-14 ; 8 peptide , a peptide corresponding to the pseudosubstrate site of PKC-3 with an alanine to serine substitution ; cDNA , complementary DNA .
responsible for the diverse , and often times divergent , cell-specific effects of phorbol esters on cellular function ( 1-3 ) .
Isoforms contained in the atypical PKC subfamily differ substantially from the other PKC subfamilies in that they contain a single , cysteine-rich finger and , in the majority of cells examined , are resistant to activation by phorbol esters ( 4-6 ) .
The role of atypical PKCs in signal transduction , the physiological agonists activating these kinases , and the responses elicited by their activation have yet to be delineated .
The human monoblastoid U937 cell expresses at least one member of each PKC subclass including PKC-£ .
Here we have studied the effect of stably overexpressing PKC-£ on growth and differentiation in the human U937 monoblastoid cell .
The U937 cell differentiates into a monocyte/ macrophage-like cell in response to a variety of agents including phorbol esters , vitamin D , retinoic acid , dimethyl sulfoxide , tumor necrosis factor-a , and y-interferon .
As assessed by multiple parameters , stable overexpression of PKC-£ induced the U937 cell to assume phenotypic characteristics associated with a more differentiated , macrophage-like cell .
Differentiation stimulated by overexpression of PKC-£ was distinctly different from the phenotype expressed by parental U937 cells induced to mature after exposure to phorbol esters .
In contrast to parental U937 cells , PKC-£ cells constitutively expressed c-jun mRNA transcripts and a low mobility AP-1 binding activity .
Since c-jun overexpression has been demonstrated to directly induce phenotypic maturation of the U937 cells ( 7 ) , the enhanced expression of c-jun provides a possible mechanism responsible for the more differentiated state of PKC-£ cells .
These findings demonstrate the ability of the atypical PKC subfamily to elicit a cellular response ( e.g .
, modulation of hematopoietic differentiation ) and indicate that differentiation stimulated by the atypical PKC subfamily differs from maturation elicited by phorbol ester-induced activation of other PKC subfamilies .
Results Generation of U937 Cells Stably Overexpressing PKC-£ .
U937 cells were cotransfected with a full-length rat PKC-£ cDNA construct subcloned into the pSV , M ( 2 ) 6 vector and a neomycin-resistant plasmid .
Following selection in G418 , groups of cells generated by separate transfections that stably overexpressed PKC-£ were identified .
The separate PKC-£ cells lines were established from a heterogeneous population of stable transfectants .
As assessed by Western blot analysis and in the absence of heavy metal induction , PKC-£ was overexpressed approximately 7-fold over levels found in parental and vector-transfected cells ( Fig .
1 A ) .
Due to the duration of exposure of this autoradiogram , PKC-£ expression in parental and vector-transfected U937 cells appears negligible .
Longer exposures , as we have previously shown , ( 8 ) , unequivocally demonstrate the existence of this isoform in parental U937 cells .
Content of a lower molecular weight species of PKC-£ ( ~M , 26,000 ) was also 1196 PKC- stimulates U937 Differentiation A Antiserum : C , 6B - 67.13 Fig .
1 .
Expression of PKC- in cells stably trans- % fected with PKC-¢ .
Equal protein concentrations of whole-cell solubilized extracts prepared from parental U937 cells ( Con ) , cells transfected with vec-® tor ( Vec A and Vec B ) , and PKC-£ ( £1 , £ ] , £ B , and { 7.13 ) were subjected to Western blot analysis using PKC- { -specific antiserum ( A ) .
In the far left lane , an extract derived from rat brain cytosol is shown .
Approximate molecular weight assignments are shown to the of the autoradiogram .
The subcellular distribution of PKC-Z in cells stably overexpressing this isoform is shown in ( B ) .
The C J arrows to the left of the autoradiogram designate the intact PKC-£ ( upper arrow ) and a specifically recognized M , 26,000 protein ( lower arrow ) .
Sample : - Brain Con - VecA VecB { i 84 - _ > - # @ a » asst 58 - ‘ r ite 73 % 48.5 - W i > El 7 1- * ; l 36.5 -- - s » tep ao an ** R We .
wees ' « goat m u ste > ) as likee Cell : _ VecA CB Subcellular Fraction : C P C P C increased in PKC-£ cells ( Fig .
1A ) .
This protein was specifically recognized by the PKC-£ antiserum since preabsorp-tion of the antiserum with the peptide used for immunization abolished its detection ( data not shown ) .
Subcellular fractionation of the extracts demonstrated that PKC-Z and the M , 26,000 protein were localized predominantly in the solubilized particulate fraction of the PKC-£ cells ( Fig .
1B ) .
Given the high constitutive level of expression of PKC-£ and the altered phenotype of these cells ( see below ) , experiments were performed , without the inclusion of a heavy metal , to further increase PKC-£ expression .
PKC-£ Cells Display Altered Growth Characteristics and Morphology .
The proliferative rate of PKC-£ cells was compared with that of parental and vector transfected cells ( Fig .
2 ) .
In the exponential growth phase , parental and vector-transfected cells displayed similar doubling times of 20.3 + 0.2 h and 21 + 2.6 h ( n = 3 ; separate experiments ) , respectively .
The PKC-£ cells proliferated at a slower growth rate with a doubling time of 31.7 + 4 h ( n = 3 ; separate experiments ) .
In other experiments , PKC-£ cells were found to have a lower saturation density at confluency ( 0.97 x 10°/ml ) than vector-transfected cells ( 1.7 x 10°/ml ) .
Significant morphological differences were apparent among PKC-£ , parental U937 or vector-transfected cells , and TPA-treated parental U937 cells .
PKC-£ cells were larger and displayed a greater degree of heterogeneity in size than parental cells ( Fig .
3 ) .
Flow cytometric analysis corroborated the larger size of the PKC-£ cells as evidenced by a greater degree of forward scatter than parental cells ( data not shown ) .
Giant cells were occasionally noted in the PKC-£ cells ( Fig .
3 ) .
While parental U937 cells displayed a centrally located , round nucleus on light microscopic anal-ysis , the nucleus of PKC-£ cells was eccentrically located with a high proportion of cells displaying nuclear indentation and lobulation that is consistent with a more differentiated phenotype ( data not shown ) .
Additionally , PKC-£ cells tended to grow in clusters adherent to the plate ( Fig .
3 ) .
In contrast , parental U937 cells did not demonstrate a Cell Growth & Differentiation Cell Number ( x 105 ) O I 5 C 3 4 |-3— 2 |- 8/§ 1 - & | | |_ j 48 72 96 120 Time ( hrs ) Fig .
2 .
- Growth rates of PKC-£ cells .
Cells ( 10°/ml ) were plated in 24-well plates in media containing 5 % fetal calf serum , and the media was not changed during the experiment .
Cell counts were performed at various times thereafter .
Each point represents the mean of four and five separate groups of vector ( 0 ) and PKC-L overexpressing cells ( A ) , respectively .
Growth of nontransfected , parental U937 cells is also shown ( @ ) .
At every time point , six determinations were made for each group of cells .
Bars , SEM for each determination .
These results were confirmed in two separate experiments .
proclivity to cluster or adhere to the plastic surface and did not form giant cells ( Fig .
3 ) .
Vector-transfected cells displayed a morphological appearance similar to that of parental U937 cells ( Fig .
3 ) .
Parental U937 cells treated with TPA were smaller than untreated control and PKC-£ cells and adhered to the plastic surface clumped together in a manner that was dissimilar from the clustered appearance of PKC-£ cells ( Fig .
3 ) .
Using our parental U937 subclone , we did not observe a more typical macrophage-like morphology that has been described after TPA treatment of other subclones of U937 cells .
At higher magnification , TPA-treated parental U937 cells exhibit a decrease in size and cytosolic volume and displayed ruffling of the plasma membrane as compared with non-TPA-treated parental U937 cells ( Fig .
4 ) .
In contrast , PKC-£ cells are larger , exhibit a smooth , nonruffled plasma membrane , have a clear perinuclear area roughly corresponding to the location of the Golgi apparatus , and contain a darkly staining cytosol ( Fig .
4 ) .
Given the tendency of PKC-£ cells to cluster , adherence to plastic was quantitated .
Adherence to plastic was low in vector-transfected cells ( 4 + 0.4 % of total cells ; n = 3 different experiments examining 4 separate groups of vector-transfected cells ) .
This degree of adherence was similar to that observed in parental U937 cells ( 6 % ) .
In PKC-£ cells , adherence to plastic was increased ( 33.8 + 5.4 % of total cells ; n = 3 different experiments examining 5 separate groups of cells overexpressing PKC- & ) .
Differentiation in duced by exposure of parental U937 cells to 100 nm TPA for 72 h also increased adherence to plastic ( 50 * 3 % of total cells ; n = 2 separate experiments ) .
PKC-£ Cells Express a More Differentiated Phenotype Which Is Dissimilar from That Expressed by TPA-treated Parental U937 Cells .
The prolonged doubling time , lower saturation density at confluency , and morphological appearance suggested that the PKC-£ cells were expressing a more differentiated phenotype than parental or vector-transfected cells .
To analyze further the differentiation status of PKC-£ cells , monocyte/macrophage-associated surface antigen expression was examined .
The antigenic phenotype of PKC-£ cells was dissimilar from both parental U937 cells and cells induced to differentiate by exposure to TPA ( Table 1 ) .
CD13 expression was markedly decreased in PKC-£ cells as compared to the high and nearly equal levels of expression seen in parental cells grown in the absence or presence of TPA .
In TPA-treated cells , increases in CD11a , CD11b , CD11c , and CD18 expression were seen .
In contrast , the levels of CD1 1a , CD11b , and CD18 in PKC-£ cells decreased below those found in parental U937 cells .
While modestly increased in parental cells by exposure to TPA , expression of CD14 was significantly enhanced in PKC-£ cells .
In PKC-£ cells , CD11c expression was increased relative to levels found in parental cells but did not attain the levels seen in TPA-treated cells .
Relative to parental U937 levels , CD71 expression decreased in TPA-treated parental cells ( 89 % in control to 56.8 % in TPA-treated cells ) but was slightly increased in PKC-£ cells ( 99 % ) .
In addition to a higher percentage of PKC-£ cells expressing CD71 , the intensity of CD71 expression per cell was increased 3-4-fold in PKC-£ cells as compared to parental U937 cells ( 23 + 3.5 , X + SEM ; and 80.2 + 17.5 mean peak intensity in parental U937 and PKC-£ cells , respectively ; P = 0.002 , Student 's t test ) .
Activity of lysosomal enzymes such as nonspecific esterase , lysozyme , and B-glucuronidase increase with TPA-induced differentiation of U937 cells ( 11 ) .
Nonspecific esterase activity in PKC-£ cells was expressed at higher levels than that seen in noninduced parental U937 cells but not as great as that seen in TPA-treated cells ( Table 2 ) .
While lysozyme was expressed in parental U937 cells , the content of this enzyme was increased to a similar degree in TPA-treated parental cells and PKC-£ cells ( Table 2 ) .
While increased in TPA-treated parental U937 cells , acid phos-phatase , and B-glucuronidase activities dramatically increased in PKC-£ cells ( Table 2 ) .
The intracellular distribution of staining for nonspecific esterase , B-glucuronidase , lysozyme , and acid phosphatase activities differed between TPA-treated parental cells and PKC-L cells .
Using acid phosphatase as an example , the staining was negative in parental cells ( Fig .
5A ) , whereas in TPA-treated control cells , diffusely positive light staining was seen throughout the cytoplasm ( Fig .
5B ) .
In PKC-£ cells , staining was intense , focal , and generally localized to a perinuclear area on the concave aspect of the nucleus ( Fig .
5C ) .
Similar staining patterns were observed for nonspecific esterase , lysozyme , and B-glucuronidase activities in TPA-treated parental U937 and PKC-£ cells ( data not shown ) .
PKC- { Overexpression Increases Expression of Other PKC Isoforms .
Differentiation of U937 cells induced by retinoic acid , vitamin D ; , or low concentrations of phorbol esters is associated with increases in PKC activity ( 8-10 ) .
In the case of differentiation stimulated by exposure to phorbol esters , a selective increase in a and B , but not e or £ , isoform expression is observed ( 8 ) .
Expression of PKC iso- 1197 1198 PKC-£ stimulates U937 Differentiation Fig .
3 .
Morphological characteristics of PKC-f cells .
Appearance of the cells was examined by inverted microscopy at a magnification of x 40 ( A , parental U937 ; B , vector-transfected parental U937 ; C , PKC-£ I ; and D , parental cells induced to differentiate by exposure to 100 nm TPA for 72 h } .
Similar findings were observed in all groups of PKC-£ cells .
Fig .
4 .
- Light microscopic appearance of PKC-£ cells .
Parental U937 ( A ) , parental U937 treated with 100 nm TPA for 72 h ( B ) , and PKC-£ cells ( C ) were fixed , treated with Wright 's stain , and examined at a magnification of X 350. forms was examined in PKC-£ overexpressing cells ( Fig .
6 ) .
As compared with parental U937 or vector-transfected cells , a large increase in PKC- was found in PKC-£ cells ( Fig .
6 ) .
PKC-B content was also increased in PKC-£ cells ( Fig .
6 ) .
A slight enhancement in PKC-e expression was observed in PKC-£ cells ( Fig .
6 ) .
In parental U937 and vector-transfected cells , PKC-e migrated either as a diffuse band or a doublet .
However , in PKC-£ cells , PKC-e generally migrated as a single , high molecular weight band .
Consonant with the increased content of the a and B iso-forms , PKC activity , as defined by phosphatidylserine and TPA-stimulated phosphotransferase activity , was increased Cell Growth & Differentiation Table 1 - Surface antigen expression in untreated and parental U937 cells exposed to TPA and PKC-£ cells TPA-treated U937 Surface antigen - Untreated U937* Cell ?
* Cell® CD11a 56.4 £17.89 93.3 + 2.6 6+ 2.7 CD11b 19.5 £ 7.4 47.2 + 5.7 2.4 £ 0.5 CD11c 3.5 £ 2.3 84.2 + 2.6 23.2 + 8.3 CD18 86 £ 9.8 98.3 £ 0.5 1.8 £ 0.4 CD71 89 £ 11.7 56.8 £ 7.9 99 £ 1.6 CD13 95.8 + 2.2 93 # 1.5 13.8 £ 3 CD14 2.0 £ 0.6 8.3 + 2.8 31.2 £ 9.1 * These values are pooled from three separate experiments .
Vector-transfected cells gave similar results as those observed in untreated parental U937 cells .
® Parental U937 cells were treated with 100 nm TPA for 72 h. © These figures represent values from five separate PKC-L overexpressing groups .
`` Mean of cells positive for the indicated surface antigen * SEM .
Table 2 - Lysosomal enzyme activities in PKC-£ cells Cell type Enzyme activity Parental - Vector - PKC- { - TPA-treated parental* Nonspecific esterase - - -/+ `` _ + ++ Acid phosphatase - - +++ + B-Glucuronidase - - +++ ++ Lysozyme + + ++ ++ * Parental U937 cells were treated with 100 nm TPA for 72 h. ® - , negative ; + , faintly positive ; ++ , positive ; and +++ , strongly positive .
© These figures are from two separate experiments .
Three separate vector- and PKC- { -transfected groups were examined in each patient .
2- to 3-fold in PKC-£ cells over levels observed in parental U937 cells ( Fig .
7 ) .
PKC-£ Cells Constitutively Overexpress c-jun and Display Increases in AP-1 Binding Activity .
Recently , it has been demonstrated that U937 cells stably overexpressing the c-jun proto-oncogene exhibit a more differentiated phenotype ( 7 ) .
To examine whether c-jun expression was altered in PKC-£ cells , Northern blot analysis examining expression of c-jun was examined ( Fig .
8 ) .
In parental U937 and vector-transfected cells , c-jun expression was undetect-able .
However , PKC-£ cells constitutively expressed c-jun .
To determine the functional significance of c-jun overexpression in PKC-£ cells , AP-1-binding activity was assessed ( Fig .
9 ) .
Specific AP-1 binding was not detected in non-TPA-treated parental U937 cells .
A remarkably similar degree of a low mobility AP-1 binding activity was detected in all PKC-£ cell lines ( Fig .
9A ) .
The specificity of this band was confirmed by the use of an AP-1-mutant oligomer .
AP-1 binding activity of a similar mobility to that observed in nontreated PKC-£ cells was found in parental U937 cells induced to differentiate by a chronic exposure to phorbol esters ( Fig .
9B ) .
Parental U937 cells induced to differentiate by retinoic acid did not display this binding activity ( data not shown ) .
Discussion Stable overexpression of PKC-£ induces U937 cells to express a more differentiated phenotype .
Characteristics substantiating a more mature phenotype of PKC-£ cells include : ( a ) a slower growth rate ; ( b ) lower saturation density at confluency ; ( c ) increased adherence to plastic ; ( d ) nuclear indentation and lobulation ; ( e ) proclivity to form giant cells ; ( f ) enhanced expression of surface antigens consistent with differentiation ( CD1 and CD71 ) ; and ( g ) increased content of B-glucuronidase , nonspecific esterase , lysozyme , and acid phosphatase activities .
These findings demonstrate the ability of PKC-£ , a member of the atypical PKC subfamily , to elicit a biological response ( e.g .
, to stimulate differentiation of certain hematopoietic cell types ) .
The degree and nature of phenotypic alterations associated with U937 differentiation vary depending upon the agent used to induce maturation ( 11-15 ) .
Differentiation-inducing agents vary in their ability to alter surface antigen expression , inhibit growth , and induce adherence to plastic surfaces ( 11-15 ) .
The various types and degrees of maturation mirror the heterogeneity of the monocyte-macrophage system ( 11 ) .
While differentiation was enhanced both by overexpression of PKC- { and TPA exposure to parental U937 cells , significant differences were noted in the phenotypic characteristics of the cells after these treatments .
PKC- { cells are larger than parental U937 cells , whereas parental cells induced to differentiate by exposure to phor-bot esters were smaller than the untreated U937 cell .
Expression of certain antigens ( e.g .
, CD11a , CD11b , and CD18 ) was increased by TPA treatment of parental U937 cells but decreased in PKC-£ cells .
Expression of the trans-ferrin receptor ( CD71 ) , which is increased upon differentiation into a macrophage-like cell ( 16 ) , was increased in PKC- { cells but decreased in TPA-treated parental U937 cells .
CD13 content was unaffected by TPA-induced differentiation but was markedly diminished in PKC-£ cells .
While expression of CD14 was enhanced in PKC-£ cells relative to levels in parental U937 cells , TPA treatment only slightly increased the level of this antigen in parental cells .
Nonspecific esterase activity was increased in TPA-treated parental U937 cells but less so in PKC-£ cells .
In contrast , acid phosphatase and B-glucuronidase activities were elevated to a greater degree in PKC-£ cells as compared to parental U937 cells exposed to TPA .
In addition , the cyto-plasmic localization of these lysosomal enzymes differed between TPA-treated parental and PKC-£ cells .
In TPA-treated parental cells , lysosomes were contained throughout the cytoplasm .
In PKC-£ cells , lysosomes were dis-cretely concentrated in the perinuclear area .
Thus , TPA-stimulated activation of conventional and novel PKC subfamily members produces a different phenotype than maturation stimulated by overexpression of an atypical PKC subfamily member .
The unique phenotype induced by PKC-£ overexpression suggests that PKC-£ may activate intracellular signal transduction pathways , other than those used by TPA-induced activation of conventional and novel PKC subfamily members to elicit this biological response .
Overexpression of PKC-£ cells was associated with increased expression of the a and B isoforms .
This increased content of conventional PKC isoforms was functionally manifested by an increase in TPA and phosphatidylserine-dependent phosphotransferase activity .
The exact mechanism responsible for the increase in a and B isoforms in the PKC-£ overexpressing cells has yet to be elucidated .
Overexpression of PKC-£ could directly lead to an increase in the content of these conventional isoforms .
Alternatively , the increased expression of conventional isoforms could be secondary to the more differentiated phenotype exhibited by the PKC-£ cells .
In U937 cells treated with differentiation-inducing agents such as retinoic acid and vitamin D , 1199 1200 _ PKC- ?
stimulates U937 Differentiation Fig .
5 .
- Localization of acid phosphatase activity in PKC-£ cells .
Parental cells ( A ) , parental cells exposed to 100 nm TPA for 72 h ( B ) , and PKC-£ cells ( C ) were stained for acid phosphatase activity .
x 320 .
PKC activity increases ( 8-10 ) .
Treatment with low concentrations of TPA that induce U937 differentiation is also associated with increased PKC activity and elevated levels of the a and B isoforms ( 8 ) .
Thus , processes triggered by U937 differentiation may mediate increased expression of these conventional PKC isoforms .
Should this be the case , then overexpression of PKC-£ would not directly enhance expression of the a and B isoforms but would do so indirectly by inducing differentiation .
The mechanisms by which PKC-£ overexpression induces differentiation of the U937 cell are unknown .
If the PKC- & -associated phosphotransferase activity were essential to stimulate differentiation , then the signal would be amplified by increases in the basal level of kinase activity resulting from the increased content of this kinase .
The physiological activators of PKC-£ and the pathways generating these activators have yet to be elucidated .
Phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate , , the product of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase , has been shown in vitro to activate PKC-£ associated kinase activity ( 17 ) .
If phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphos-phate , induced activation of PKC-Z occurs in vivo , then a link between tyrosine signaling pathways and the activation of atypical PKC subfamily would be predicted .
A role has been proposed for PKC-£ in oocyte maturation induced by insulin , ras , and phosphatidylcholine-hydrolyzing phos-pholipase C ( 18 , 19 ) .
Introduction of ras into murine my-eloid cells has been reported to induce characteristics consistent with monocytic differentiation ( 20 ) .
Perhaps ras and PKC-£ lie on a signal transduction pathway that can modulate certain forms of hematopoietic differentiation as has been suggested for ras ( 18 , 19 ) .
Alternatively , PKC-£ could stimulate U937 differentiation via a non-kinase mechanism .
PKC- { contains one cysteine-rich finger in the C1 domain that is predicted to confer the capability to bind to DNA ( 4 ) .
Through a direct interaction with DNA via the zinc finger motif , PKC-£ could alter the regulation of gene expression .
Direct experimental evidence for such a mechanism has yet to be described .
Thus , further studies will be required to determine the signal transduction pathways by which PKC- { £ overexpression induces phenotypic maturation of U937 cells .
The increased mass of the a and B isoforms associated with PKC-£ overexpression could be directly involved in stimulating the differentiation process .
Since TPA activates the a and B isoforms and stimulates U937 differentiation , an increase in the content of these isoforms resulting in a sufficiently increased level of basal activation would be expected to induce a similar type of differentiation as that elicited by TPA .
The unique phenotypic characteristics of PKC-£ overexpressing cells indicated that the PKC-£ cell was distinct from parental U937 cells induced to differentiate by phorbol esters .
This difference in phenotypic characteristics makes it seem less likely that an increase in the basal kinase activity of conventional PKC isoforms is solely responsible for the differentiation seen in the PKC-£ cells .
However , differences in the phenotypic characteristics between PKC-£ cells and TPA-treated parental U937 cells could be due to the additional cellular responses elicited by the unique signals generated in phorbol ester-treated cells such as translocation and down-regulation of conventional and novel PKC isoforms .
Therefore , with the available in-formation , a role for the increased mass of conventional PKC isoforms in stimulating maturation of PKC-£ cells has yet to be fully elucidated .
Cell Growth & Differentiation Antiserum : O Cell : - Con VecA { 713 VecB _ { 1 Veet LJ ~ ' m ?
P h Q ~ Nets imac dilitise - > > b Antiserum : ﬂ Cell : Con vecAa L713 VecB { t Veet { J - `` ~- CB -CBD - ap Antiserum : € Cell : Con Veca { 7.13 VecB { i veec - LJ Fig .
6 .
Endogenous PKC isoform content in PKC-£ cells .
Equal protein concentrations of whole-cell solubilized fractions prepared from parental U937 ( Con ) , vector-transfected ( Vec A , Vec B , and Vec C ) , and PKC-£ ( £7.13 , { 1 , and { J ) cells were analyzed by Western blot analysis using isoform-specific antisera for the a ( top panel ) , B ( middle panel ) , and e ( lower panel ! )
PKC isoforms .
The line shown to the side of the autoradiogram indicates the location of the appropriate isoform .
These results were confirmed in separate experiments .
The ability of c-jun to stimulate differentiation of U937 cells has been recently demonstrated ( 7 ) .
The phenotypi-cally more differentiated PKC-£ cells constitutively overexpress c-jun , which is functionally accompanied by an increase in AP-1 binding activity .
An increase in c-jun expression and a similar low mobility AP-1 binding activity were also observed in parental U937 cells induced to differentiate by a chronic exposure to phorbol esters .
These results do not discriminate whether the increased c-jun and AP-1 binding activity are secondary to PKC-£ overexpression or are due to the increases in conventional PKC isoform expression observed in these cells .
If increased c-jun expression and enhanced AP-1 binding activity are directly responsible for differentiation , then the phenotypic dissim-larities between parental and PKC-£ cells could be explained on the basis of different levels of these parameters .
AP-1 binding activity was remarkably similar among PKC-£ cells lines and generally was of a higher intensity than that induced in parental U937 cells chronically exposed to TPA .
Perhaps differences in AP-1 binding activity could influence the type or degree of maturation exhibited by the U937 cell .
12p 120 ) - -- - sof 10 } sot a & aal-2 % 3 ° 6 x < u sp eof 40 } -o & x 9 & o 2 « l- tor 20 2 } 20h Cells : | Control =- Vector - PKGZ CGontrai - Vector .
PKC ] Control .
Vector - PKCT Fig .
7 .
- Phosphatidylserine and TPA-stimulated PKC activity in PKC-£ cells .
Equal amounts of protein derived from parental U937 ( control ) , vector , and PKC-£ cells ( see Fig .
8 ) were analyzed for phosphatidylserine and TPA-stimulated kinase activity using histone III-S , MBP , _ ; , , and 8 peptide ( left , center , and right panels , respectively ) .
PKC activity ( see ordinate ) was defined as the difference between cpm incorporated in the absence and presence of phosphatidylserine and TPA .
Bars , SEM , where n = 4 separate groups of vector-transfected and PKC-Z cell lines .
This experiment was repeated with similar results .
Cell : 6 v C EtBr Fig .
8 .
- Basal levels of c-jun expression in PKC-£ cells .
Northern btot analysis using 20 pg of total RNA isolated from PKC- ( { , vector-transfected ( V ) , and parental U937 ( C ) cells was performed using a c-jun cDNA probe .
Ethidium bromide staining of the blot ( Et8r ) is shown below the autoradiogram .
Similar increases in c-jun expression were seen in another experiment using separate vector-transfected and PKC-£ lines .
This study demonstrates that PKC-£ , a member of the atypical PKC subfamily , induces a cellular response ( e.g .
, differentiation of human leukemic cells ) .
Differences in the phenotypic characteristics of U937 cells induced to differentiate in response to TPA and PKC-£ overexpression suggest that the atypical and conventional/novel PKC isoforms lie on dissimilar signal transduction pathways .
The ability of PKC-£ overexpression to stimulate differentiation in a manner distinct from that produced by activation of other PKC family members raises the exciting possibility that novel therapeutic interventions specifically designed to selectively activate the PKC-£ signal transduction pathway could be developed for use in the treatment of certain forms of neoplasia .
1201 1202 PKC-¢ stimulates U937 Differentiation Extract : _ Con Vec pcl Con Vee rec 4 bos B p 74s bou OB 0 ris - AP- 71 F AP-M 1 o !
a !
6 ~ U e a a o Materials and Methods Cell Culture .
U937 cell were maintained as described previously ( 8 ) .
Cell viability was assessed by trypan blue ex-clusion .
Total or adherent/nonadherent cells were counted as described elsewhere ( 9 ) using a Coulter counter .
Generation of Stable Transfectants .
U937 cells were cotransfected with 10 pg of pMAMneo ( Clonetech ) and either 20 pg of the PKC-£ plasmid or 20 pg of the vector without the PKC-£ insert by electrophoration at 0.25 kV and 960 pF using a Biorad Gene Pulser .
The full-length , rat PKC-£ clone ( 6 ) , generously provided by Dr. J. Knopf , Genetics Institute ( Boston , MA ) was subcloned into the pSV , M ( 2 ) 6 vector .
The PKC-£ insert in the pSV , M ( 2 ) 6 vector is controlled by the met IIA promoter ( 21 ) .
This vector was kindly provided by Dr. Marilyn Sleigh , CSIRO ( Sydney , Australia ) .
Prior to transfection , the plasmids were purified by cesium chloride centrifugation and linearized with Scal Seventy-two h after the transfection , cells were placed in 0.5 mg/ml G418 .
Cells stably expressing G418 resistance were screened for PKC-£ expression using Western blot analysis .
Five heterogenous groups of cells stably overexpressing PKC-Z obtained from separate transfections were identified .
All groups of PKC-£ cells displayed similar phenotypic characteristics .
These cells have maintained a stable level of PKC-£ overexpression and phenotypic characteristics for at least a 12-month period .
Western Blot Analysis .
Whole-cell solubilized extracts and separate cytosolic and solubilized particulate fractions were prepared as described ( 8 ) .
Protein determination was performed by the Bradford method ( 22 ) .
Western blot analysis was performed as described elsewhere using isoform-specific antisera and a '* % I-protein A detection system ( 8 ) .
Densitometric analysis of the autoradiograms was performed using a Pharmacia LKB Ultrascan XL laser densi-tometer .
Microscopy .
Cells maintained in culture were photographed with a Nikon Diaphot inverted microscope .
Wright 's stain of cytospin preparations was done using a Midas I1 Automatic Wright Stainer ( Harleco ) and photographed with a Nikon Microphot-FX microscope .
Analysis of nonspecific esterase , B-glucuronidase , and acid phosphatase activities was done using kits purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. After staining with acridine orange , Extract : _ CON TPA TPA { CON TPA TPA [ Fig .
9 .
AP-1 binding activity in PKC-Z cells .
Equal protein concentrations of extracts derived from B parental - and | vector-transfected U937 cells and various clones of *~ “ s PKC- { cells were analyzed for o - C @ U6B 4h 72h 4h - 72h ro AP - [ - APAM -7 AP-1 binding activity ( A ) .
In B , AP-1 binding activity is compared in parental U937 cells treated in the absence of presence of 100 nm TPA for 72 h and non-TPA-treated PKC-£ cells .
The symbols to the left of the autoradiograms indicate nonspecific bands ( O ) and specifically ( - ) retarded AP-1 complex .
The labeled oligomer is indicated above the autoradiograms with AP-1M , which corresponds to a ' mutated AP-1 oligomer that does not bind the AP-1 complex .
These experiments were repeated with similar results .
lysozyme content was analyzed using a Ziess fluorescent microscope ( 23 ) .
Flow Cytometric Analysis .
The following panel of antibodies was used to examine surface antigen expression : My4 ( CD14 ) ; My7 ( CD13 ) ; MOQ1 ( CD11b ) ; T9 ( CD71 , obtained from Coulter ) ; and CD11a , CD11c , and CD18 ( ob-tained from Dako ) .
Antibodies were either phycoerythrin or fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated , and were used at the manufacturer 's recommended concentration .
Isotype and fluorochrome-matched mouse antihuman nonspecific controls were included in every analysis to establish nega-tivity .
For each test , approximately 0.5 X 10° cells were incubated 15 min at room temperature with the appropriate antibody .
They were then washed in PBS with 3.7 % formaldehyde as a fixative .
Samples were centrifuged , superna-tants were decanted , and the cells were resuspended in the PBS/formaldehyde solution .
Analysis was performed on a FACScan flow cytometer .
Light scatter parameters were initially set to place the cell populations centrally in the forward scatter versus side scatter .
Fluorescence parameters were adjusted to place the negative ( isotype ) control populations in the lower left quadrant of the FL-1 and FL-2 histogram .
Analysis was gated to exclude dead cells and debris .
Data was analyzed by setting cursors to place 99 % of cells marked with control in the lower left quadrant .
Cell populations falling outside the lower left quadrant were considered positive .
Protein Kinase C Activity Determination .
Protein kinase C activity was determined using a previously described method with histone III-S , MBP , _ ; , , and 8 peptide as sub-strates ( 8 ) .
PKC activity was defined as the difference in com incorporated into the substrate in the absence and presence of TPA and phosphatidylserine .
Northern Blot Analysis .
RNA was extracted using a single-step acid quanidinium thiocyanate-phenol extraction technique ( 24 ) .
RNA ( 20 pug ) was electrophoresed , transferred to nylon filters , and hybridized to random pres-sure-labeled cDNA probes ( 25 ) .
Ethidium bromide staining was used to confirm the integrity of the RNA and assess the equivalency of loading .
The probe for c-jun was provided by James McCubrey , East Carolina University ( Greenville , NC ) .
Cell Growth & Differentiation Gel Shift Analysis .
Whole-cell extracts were prepared form U937 cells by the following technique , as described previously ( 26 ) .
Cells ( 2-5 x 10° ) were washed twice with PBS and pelleted .
The pellet was resuspended in 50 pl of a buffer containing 20 mm Tris-HCl ( pH 7.5 ) , 2 mm dithioth-eritol , 20 % ( v/v ) glycerol , and 0.4 mm KCI , immediately frozen in dry ice , and thawed .
The freeze/thaw cycle was repeated .
The suspension was centrifuged at 4°C for 15 min .
Protein concentration of the resulting supernatant was determined by the Bradford technique ( 22 ) .
AP-1 binding activity was assessed with DNA oligomers corresponding to the AP-1 element in the collagenase promoter and a mutant AP-1 enhancer element which were used as described previously ( 27 ) .
Double-stranded oligomers were formed by annealing 1 ug/ml ( 0.05 pg each/ul ) of the pairs in 50 mm Tris-HCI ( pH 8.0 ) , 10 mM MgCl ; and to 50 mm NaCl .
One hundred-ng amounts of oligomers were labeled by fill-in with Klenow fragment and { « - `` `` P ] dATP ( 3,000 Ci/mmol ) .
Labeled oligomers ( 0.1 ng , approximately 40,000 cpm ) were added to equal concentrations of receptor extract ( 5-15 pug ) in 20 pl of buffer containing 25 mm Tris-HCl ( pH 7.8 ) , 0.5 mm EDTA , 0.5 mm KCI , 1 mm dithiothereitol , 150 ug/ml polydeoxyinsinic-de-oxycytidylic acid , 3 ug/ml aprotinin , 0.05 % Triton X-100 , 10 % glycerol , and 12 pg/ml sonicated salmon sperm DNA and incubated for 30 min at room temperature .
The reaction mixtures were run at 4°C on a nondenaturing 5 % polyacryl-amide gel .
Autoradiography was performed to assess mobility of the labeled oligomers .
Acknowledgments We appreciate the patience and expert word processing assistance of Nancy Hamm and the subcloning performed by Richard Stanzak .
References 1 .
Nishizuka , Y. Intracellular signaling by hydrolysis of phospholypids and activation of protein kinase C. Science ( Washington DC ) , 258 : 607-614 , 1992 .
2 .
Asaoka , Y. , Nakamura , S. , Yoshida , K. , and Nishizuka , Y .
Protein kinase C , calcium and phospholipid degradation .
Trends Biochem .
Sci .
, 17 : 414-417 , 1992 .
3 .
Parker , P. , Kour , G. , Marais , R. , Mitchell , F. , Pears , C. , Stabel , S. , and Webster , C. Protein kinase C-a family affair .
Mol .
Cell Endo .
65 : 1-11 , 1989 .
4 .
Ono , Y. , Fugii , T. , Ogita , K. , Kikkawa , U. , Igarashi , I. , and Nishizuka , Y .
Protein kinase C-£ subspecies from rat brain : its structure , expression , and properties .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA , 86 : 3099-3103 , 1989 .
5 .
Nakanishi , H. , and Exton , J. Purification and characterization of the £ isoform of protein kinase C from bovine kidney .
J. Biol .
Chem .
, 267 : 16347-16354 , 1992 .
6 .
Ways , D. K. , Cook , P. P. Webster , C. , and Parker , P. J .
Effect of phorbol esters on protein kinase C- { .
J. Biol .
Chem .
, 267 : 4799-4805 , 1992 .
7 .
Szabo , E. , Preis , L. H. , and Birrer , M. J. Constitutive c-jun expression induces partial macrophage differentiation in U937 cells .
Cell Growth & Differ .
, 5 : 439-446 , 1994 .
8 .
Ways , D. K. , Messer , B. , Garris , T. O. , Qin , W. , Cook , P. P. , and Parker , P. J. Modulation of protein kinase C-e by phorbol esters in the monoblastoid U937 cell .
Cancer Res .
, 52 : 5604-5609 , 1992 .
9 .
Ways , D. , Dodd , R. , Bennett , T. , Gray , T. , and Earp , H. 1,25-Dihydroxy vitamin D , enhances phorbol ester-stimulated differentiation and protein kinase C-dependent substrate phosphorylation activity in the U937 human monoblastoid cell .
Endocrinology , 121 : 1654-1660 , 1987 .
10 .
Ways , D. , Dodd , R. , Bennett , T. , Hooker , J. , and Earp , H. Effect of retinoic acid on phorbol ester-stimulated differentiation and protein kinase C-dependent phosphorylation in the U937 human monoblastoid cell .
Cancer Res .
, 48 : 5779-5787 , 1088 .
11 .
Harris , P. , and Ralph , P. Human leukemic models of myelomocytic development : a review of the HL-60 and U937 cell lines .
J. Leuk .
Biol .
, 37 : 407-422 , 1985 .
12 .
Kamijo , R. , Takeda , K. , Nagumo , M. , and Konno , K. Effects of combinations of transforming growth factor-B ; and tumor necrosis factor on induction of differentiation of human myelogenous leukemic cell lines .
J .
Immunol .
, 144 : 1311-1316 , 1990 .
13 .
Brickell , P. M. , and Katz , D. R. Regulation of c-fgr messenger RNA levels in U937 cells treated with different modulating agents .
Immunology , 76 : 65-71 , 1992 .
14 .
Koehler , M. , Goorha , R. , Kitchingman , G. , Ayers , G. D. , and Mirro , J .
A monoclonal antibody to a novel surface antigen , MKW , blocks the antipro-liferative and differentiation effects of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stim-ulating factor and vitamin D ; .
Blood , 80 : 367-373 , 1992 .
15 .
Harris , P. E. , Ralph , P. , Litcofsky , P. and Moore , M. A. S. Distinct activities of interferon-y , lymphokine , and cytokine differentiation-inducing factors acting on the human monoblastic leukemia cell line U937 .
Cancer Res .
, 45 : 9-13 , 1985 .
16 .
Schwarting , R. , and Stein , H. Cluster report : CD71 .
in : W. Knapp ( ed . )
, Leucocyte Typing IV .
White Cell Differentiation Antigens , pp .
455-460 .
New York : Oxford University Press , 1989 .
17 .
Nakanishi , H. , Brewer , K. , and Exton , J. Activation of the Z isozyme of protein kinase C by phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate .
J. Biol .
Chem .
, 268 : 13-16 , 1993 .
18 .
Dominguez , I. , Diaz-Meco , M. , Municio , M. , Berra , E. , Herreros , A. , Cornet , M. , Sanz , L. , and Moscat , J .
Evidence for a role of protein kinase C { subspecies in maturation of Xenopus laevis oocytes .
Mol .
Cell Biol .
, 12 : 3776-3783 , 1992 .
19 .
Berra , E. , Diaz-Meco , M. , Dominguez , I. , Municio , M. , Sanz , L. , Lozano , J. , Chapkin , R. , and Moscat , J .
Protein kinase C { isoform is critical for mitogenic signal transduction .
Cell , 74 : 555-563 , 1993 .
20 .
Hibi , S. , Lohler , J. , Friel , J. , Stocking , L. , and Ostertag , W. Induction of monocytic differentiation and tumorigenicity by v-Ha-ras in differentiation arrested hematopoietic cells .
Blood , 81 : 1841-1848 , 1993 .
21 .
McNeall , J. , S & nchez , A. , Gray , P. , Chesterman , C. , and Sleigh , M. Hyperinducible gene expression from a metallothionein promoter containing additional metal-responsive elements .
Gene ( Amst . )
, 76 : 81-88 , 1989 .
22 .
Bradford , M. A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of mi-crogram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding .
Anal .
Biochem .
, 72 : 248-254 , 1976 .
23 .
Robbins , E. , Marcus , P. , and Garratas , N. Dynamics of acridine orange-cell interaction II .
Dye-induced ultrastructural changes in multivesicular bodies ( acridine orange particles ) .
J .
Cell Biol .
, 21 : 49-62 , 1964 .
24 .
Chomczynski , P. , and Sacchi , N. Single-step method of RNA isolated by acid guanidinum thiocynate-phenol-chloroform extraction .
Anal .
Biochem .
, 162 : 156-159 , 1987 .
25 .
McCubrey , J. , Steelman , L. , Sandlin , G. , Riddle , R. , and Ways , D. Effects of phorbol esters on an interleukin-3-dependent cell line .
Blood , 76 : 63-72 , 1990 .
26 .
Ways , D. , Qin , W. , Garris , T. , Chen , J. , Hao , E. , Cooper , D. , Usala , S. , Parker , P. , and Cook , P. Effects of chronic phorbol ester treatment on protein kinase C activity , content , and gene expression in the human monoblastoid U937 cell .
Cell Growth & Differ .
, 5 : 161-169 , 1994 .
27 .
Offringa , R. , Gebel , S. , van Dam , H. , Timmers , M. , Smits , A. , Zwart , R. , Stein , B. , Box , J. , van der Eb , A. , and Herrlick , P. A novel function of the transforming domain of Ela : repression of AP-1 activity .
Cell , 62 : 527-538 , 1990 .
1203
