Missense Mutation in Exon 7 of the Common y Chain Gene Causes a Moderate Form of X-linked Combined Immunodeficiency Frank C. Schmalstieg , ** Warren J. Leonard , Masayuki Noguchi , `` Maria Berg , `` H. Elizabeth Rudioff , * Richard M. Denney , * Sanat K. Dave , * Edward G. Brooks , * and Armond S. Goldman** Departments of *Pediatrics , *Human Biological Chemistry and Genetics , and Microbiology and Immunology , University of Texas Medical Branch , Galveston , Texas 77555-0369 ; and the `` Laboratory of Molecular Immunology , National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , Maryland 20892 Abstract Clinical and immunologic features of a recently recognized X-linked combined immunodeficiency disease ( XCID ) suggested that XCID and X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency ( XSCID ) might arise from different genetic defects .
The recent discovery of mutations in the common y chain ( y . )
gene , a constituent of several cytokine receptors , in XSCID provided an opportunity to test directly whether a previously unrecognized mutation in this same gene was responsible for XCID .
The status of X chromosome inactivation in blood leukocytes from obligate carriers of XCID was determined from the polymorphic , short tandem repeats ( CAG ) , in the androgen receptor gene , which also contains a methylation-sensitive Hpall site .
As in XSCID , X-chromosome inactivation in obligate carriers of XCID was nonrandom in T and B lymphocytes .
In addition , X chromosome inactivation in PMNs was variable .
Findings from this analysis prompted sequencing of the y , gene in this pedigree .
A missense mutation in the region coding for the cytoplasmic portion of the 7 , gene was found in three affected males but not in a normal brother .
Therefore , this point mutation in the y , gene leads to a less severe degree of deficiency in cellular and humoral immunity than that seen in XSCID .
( J. Clin .
Invest .
1995 .
95:1169-1173 . )
Key words : T lympho-cyte « immunodeficiency « IL-2R « X chromosome « genetics Introduction In 1990 , we reported a novel X-linked combined immunodeficiency ( XCID ) ' distinct from X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency ( XSCID ) in a large kindred of English origin ( 1 ) .
The patients displayed repeated , chronic bacterial infections of Portions of this work appeared in abstract form ( Pediatr .
Res .
35:76A , 1994 ) .
Address correspondence to Frank C. Schmalstieg , M.D .
, Ph.D. , Division of Immunology Department of Pediatrics , The Children 's Hospital , Room C-236 , The University of Texas Medical Branch , Galveston , TX 77555-0369 .
FAX : 409-772-5045 .
Received for publication 20 September 1994 and in revised form 10 November 1994 .
1 .
Abbreviations used in this paper : AR , androgen receptor ; y , , common y chain ; SSCP , single-stranded conformational polymorphisms ; XCID , X-linked combined immunodeficiency ; XSCID , X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency .
The Journal of Clinical Investigation , Inc. Volume 95 , March 1995 , 1169-1173 the middle ear , paranasal sinuses , bronchi , and lungs as well as severe or recurrent varicella , Herpes simplex , and papilloma virus infections .
In contrast to XSCID , other opportunistic infections including Prewumocystis carrini pneumonia were not seen , and some affected males survived into late childhood or adult-hood .
This spectrum of infections suggested that both humoral and cellular immunity were deficient , but not to the degree found in XSCID .
Indeed , serum immunoglobulin levels were normal , whereas they are decreased in XSCID .
The formation of specific serum IgG and IgA antibodies was , however , profoundly diminished in XCID ( 1 ) , most likely due to T cell defects .
Indeed , CD4 and CD8 T cells were significantly de-creased , but not to the extent seen in XSCID ( 1 ) .
XCID also differed from classical XSCID in that blood T cells were predominantly CD4SRO+ and an increase in blood CD4+ T cells occurred postnatally ( 1 , 2 , .
Finally , the variable region repertoire in T cell receptors ( a/ ) on blood T cells was altered in the affected males ( 3 ) .
We investigated the molecular relationships between XCID and XSCID by three coupled approaches .
First , we examined the pattern of X chromosome inactivation in blood T cells , B-lymphoblastoid cells and PMNs from obligate carriers of the disease using the methylation status of the STR , ( CAG ) , , in the AR gene , ( 4 , 5 ) since nonrandom X inactivation is found in carriers of XSCID ( 6-8 ) .
Second we examined whether the segregation of XCID was closely linked to the y , gene , because mutations in that gene are responsible for XSCID ( 9 ) .
The segregation of XCID with polymorphisms of the androgen receptor ( AR ) gene ( Xq11.1 ) , intron 1 of the common y chain ( y . )
gene ( Xq13 ) ( 9 , 10 ) , and the dinucleotide repeat ( CA ) , in the DXS458 locus ( Xq23 ) ( 11 , 12 ) were investigated for this purpose .
Finally , based upon findings from those studies , the y. gene from males affected with XCID was sequenced to determine if a mutation was present .
Methods Subjects .
The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Texas Medical Branch .
All subjects gave informed consent for the study .
B-lymphoblastoid cell lines from all available carriers and affected males , and T cells and PMNs from six obligate carriers were investigated ( Fig .
1 ) .
All the available carriers were in good health without evidence of infection at the time they were studied .
Subjects used for linkage and heteroduplex study were chosen based on their lineage and availability .
The three affected males whose genomic DNA was sequenced , were used because they each represented a separate branch of this family with affected males .
DNA isolation .
Mononuclear cells and PMNs were prepared from heparinized venous blood by dextran sedimentation and Ficoll-Hypaque centrifugation ( 13 ) .
T lymphocytes were purified using magnetic beads coupled to anti-CD3 ( Miltenyi Biotec , Sunnyvale , CA ) ( 14 ) .
The purity of the cell preparations was monitored by flow cytometry ( 1 ) .
B-lymph- Moderate X-linked Combined Immunodeficiency 1169 VI Vil Figure 1 .
Pedigree of the kindred with XCID .
The key for the symbols are as follows : Obligate carrier females ( @ ) ; females with suspected carrier status based on non-random X-inactivation ( @ ) ; affected males ( m ) ; miscarriage ( « ) .
A diagonal line represents deceased family mem-bers .
Individuals shown in subsequent figures are identified by generation number at the sides of the chart and a letter designation within generations .
oblastoid cell lines were produced by infection of blood B cells with Epstein-Barr virus ( 15 ) .
DNA from the cell preparations was obtained by NP-40 lysis , proteinase K digestion , and phenol-chloroform extraction ( 16 ) or by passage through DNA purification columns ( Genomic DNA Isolation Kit , Boehringer Mannheim , Indianapolis , IN ) according to the manufacturer 's directions .
PCR amplification of the AR gene short tandem repeat ( STR ) and the dinucleotide repeat in the DXS458 locus .
The sense ( 5'-TCCAGA-ATCTGTTCCAGAGCGTGC-3 ' ) and anti-sense ( 5-GCTGTGAAG-GTTGCTGTTCCTCAT-3 ' ) primers from the AR gene ( 12.5 pmol each ) were mixed with 250 ng of genomic DNA , 4 U of Taq DNA polymerase , 250 uM deoxynucleoside triphosphates ( dNTPs ) ( 2.5 4Ci [ P ] dCTP [ 3,000 Ci/umole ] ) , and 1.5 mM MgC1 ; ( 4 ) in the manufacturer 's suggested buffer ( Perkin-Elmer Cetus , Norwalk , CT ) ( total volume , 25 wl ) .
DNA was amplified for 25 cycles at 95°C for 1 min , 65°C for 1 min , and 72°C for 1 min .
Amplifications were preceded by a primary denaturation step ( 95°C for 5 min ) and followed by a final extension step ( 72°C for 8 min ) after the last cycle ( 4 ) .
When methylation status of the genomic DNA was examined by digestion with Hpall , the DNA ( 250 ng ) was digested with Hpall ( Promega ) in a reaction volume of 4 pl ( in the manufacturer 's recommended buffer ) for 2 h at 37°C ( 17 ) before amplification .
After addition of stop buffer , the samples were denatured at 95°C for 5 min and electrophoresed on 4 % polyacrylamide/8M urea at 38 W for 2 h. Resultant bands were visualized by ethidium bromide staining , or by radioautography using Hyper-film- MP ( Amersham Corp. , Arlington Heights , IL ) .
PCR conditions for amplification of the DSX458 locus were as follows : The sense ( 5'-GATAAAACTGCATAGAAATGCG-3 ' ) and antisense ( 5'-CAACTG-GGATATTGACATTG-3 ' ) primers ( 12.5 pmol each ) were mixed with 20 ng of genomic DNA , 1 unit of Taq DNA polymerase , 200 LM dNTPs ( 2.5 uCi { P ] dCTP [ 3,000 Ci/umole ] ) , and 1.5 mM MgCl ; ( 18 ) .
Analyses of polymorphisms of the y , gene .
SSCP analyses were performed as previously described ( 9 ) .
Sense ( 5-GAATGAAGACAC-CACAGCTG-3 ' ) and anti-sense ( 5'-GGGCATAGTGGTCAGGAAG-3 ' ) primers from intron 1 of the y , gene ( 1 uM each ) were mixed with 200 ng of genomic DNA , 0.45 U of Taq DNA polymerase , 200 uM deoxynucleoside triphosphates ( dNTPs ) , 25 uM dCTP with 1 4Ci of [ P ] dCTP and 1.0 mM MgCl ; in the manufacturer 's suggested buffer ( Perkin-Elmer Cetus , Norwalk , CT ) ( total volume , 15 pl ) .
The DNA was denatured ( 94°C for 5 min ) , amplified for 30 cycles at 94°C for 1 min , 55°C for 1 min , and 72°C for 1 min and followed by a final extension step ( 72°C for 7 min ) after the last cycle .
After addition of stop buffer ( USB ) , the samples were denatured at 95°C for 10 min , 1170 Schmalstieg et al .
quenched in an ice bath , and 4-ul aliquots electrophoresed on non-denaturing 5 % polyacrylamide gels at constant power ( 25 W ) at room temperature or at 4°C for 2 h. After drying , the resultant bands were visualized by autoradiography on Hyperfilim-MP ( Amersham Corp. ) exposed for 30 min to 1 h at -70°C .
For heteroduplex formation , 4 ul of PCR amplification products described in the SSCP analysis were mixed in pairs and heated to 95°C for 5 min and allowed to cool slowly to room temperature .
The mixture was then added to 3 Ll of loading buffer ( 15 % Ficol , 0.05 % bromophe-nol blue , and 0.05 % xylene cyanol ) and 4 wl of this mixture were then subjected to non-denaturing electrophoresis as described for the SSCP analysis .
Sequencing of the y , gene .
Genomic DNA from EBV B lymphocytes was utilized for nested-PCR amplifications of the y , gene and subsequent dideoxy chain termination sequencing ( 9 ) .
For two patients , exon 7 was sequenced on the Applied Biosystems Model 373A automated sequencing system ( Applied Biosystems , Foster City , CA ) using the PRISM ** Ready Reaction DyeDeoxy * `` Terminator Cycle Sequencing Kit ( Applied Biosystems , Foster City , CA ) according to the manufacturer 's directions .
Results X chromosome inactivation in obligate carriers .
Flow cytometry ( FACScan® , Becton-Dickinson , Moutainview CA ) ( 1 ) was carried out on blood lymphocytes from three healthy carriers .
The results ( mean+standard deviation ; normal values in paren-theses ) revealed normal profiles of blood T cells , B cells , and NK cells [ CD3+ , 80+13 ( 70+7 ) ; CD4+ , 40+9 ( 40+6 ) ; CD8+ , 28+12 ( 21+6 ) ; CD19+ , 13+3 ( 12+6 ) ; CD16+ , 4+1 ( 12+5 ) . ]
In addition , over 95 % of blood T cells from two carriers that were tested were TCR a/ @ + .
Products from the AR gene ranging from ~ 280 to 310 bp were produced by amplification of genomic DNA from T lymphocytes , B-lymphoblastoid cells , and PMNs of six obligate carriers .
When the genomic DNA was digested with Hpall , one band predominated in the amplified DNA from T cells ( Fig .
2 A ) and B-lymphoblastoid cells ( Fig .
2 B ) , but both bands were variably amplified in the case of PMNs ( Fig .
2 C ) .
Those findings indicated that X chromosome inactivation in XCID carriers was non-random in T and B cells , but variable in PMNs from obligate carriers .
An exception to this pattern was detected in one carrier female ( Fig .
3 ) .
This woman exhibited nonrandom X chromosome inactivation in T cells , B-lymphoblastoid cells , and PMNs .
X chromosome use for her T cells was similar to that found in the other obligate carriers .
However , the maternally derived , abnormal X chromosome was used in her B-lymphoblastoid cells and PMNs ( Fig .
3 ) .
Polymorphism analyses of the y , gene .
SSCP analysis for intron 1 and intron 2 of the y , was uninformative . ``
However , heteroduplex formation between distinct alleles in intron 1 was found ( Fig .
4 A , VI-O , an affected male and VI-N , his normal brother ) by mixing experiments .
In addition , several obligate carriers also demonstrated heteroduplexes , indicating heterozy-gosity ( Fig .
4 B ) .
Subsequently , the entire y , gene was sequenced for individuals VI-N and VI-O .
VI-O , but not VI-N , 2 .
A polymorphism in intron 1 of the y. gene detected by SSCP analysis was previously reported in abstract form ( Pediatr .
Res .
35:76A , 1994 ) .
This apparent polymorphism was secondary to heteroduplex formation under the conditions the assay was performed .
If the assay is performed under conditions precluding heteroduplex formation , no polymorphism by SSCP analysis is observed .
-Hpa II +Hpa II -Hpa II +Hpa II Trp a arse VI-P_V-H VIO VI-P V-H VI-P V-O IV-1 VLP V-O IV -Hpa II +Hpa II 2s soma on laitos ] VI-P V-O0 VI-P V-O Figure 2 .
X chromosome inactivation in blood T lymphocytes , B-lymphoblastoid cells , and PMNs using the methylation status of the ( CAG ) , STR loci of the AR gene .
Genomic DNA was digested or not digested with Hpall before amplification .
The 310- and 280-bp polymorphisms were then demonstrated by autoradiography after electrophoresis in 4 % polyacrylamide/8 M urea gels .
Five different alleles for the AR gene were represented in this family .
( A ) T lymphocytes : The 310- and 280-bp polymorphisms were demonstrated in two females ( V-H and VI-P ) before Hpall digestion .
In both cases , the lower band was absent after Hpall digestion , indicating nonrandom X-inactivation and that the 310-bp band was derived from the maternal X chromosome .
An affected male , VI-O , son of V-O exhibited the 280-bp band and indicated a crossover event involving the AR locus .
( B ) B lymphocytes : the 280-and 310-bp polymorphisms were found in EBV-transformed lymphocytes from carriers VI-P and V-O , but a slightly higher molecular weight lower band is seen in carrier IV-I .
Only the 310-bp band is visible when DNA from these carriers was digested with Hpall before amplification indicating non-random X chromosome inactivation in these lymphoblastoid cells .
( C ) PMNs : The 310- and 280-bp bands were present in differing amounts after Hpall digestion of DNA from carriers VI-P and V-O .
This is representative of other carriers ( data not shown ) and indicates variable X chromosome inactivation in PMNs .
demonstrated a missense mutation at amino acid 271 ( leucine > glutamine ) corresponding to a ( CTG - CAG ) change in exon 7 ( Fig .
5 ) .
Subsequent sequencing of two additional affected males ( V-F and VI-A ) confirmed the same mutation in the SH2 subdomain region ( Fig .
5 ) .
Genetic analysis of XCID .
Polymorphisms in the AR gene , T Cells PMNs B Cells igs Figure 3 .
Alternative X chromosome usage for blood T lymphocytes and EBV-transformed B lymphocytes and PMNs in one female carrier .
X chromosome inactivation was non-random in T e ** # .
: # pss .
.
Q Q des cells , B-lymphoblastoid ' cells , and PMNs .
T cells e used the paternally derived X chromosome and B-lymphoblastoid cells and PMNs used the maternally derived X chromosome .
The + and - designations are for digestion or no digestion , respectively , with Hpall before PCR amplification of the STR in the AR gene .
VI-N VIO _ VEN VO VEN VO + + + + + VI-L _ VHL MLB VIB N PHEV N- viN vo .
vio Heteroduplexes I : win ws we « @ & - a # ... ..
Figure 4 .
Heteroduplex analysis of intron 1 of the y , gene .
( Left ) Heteroduplex formation between affected ( VI-O ) and non-affected ( VI-N ) males .
N is a normal unaffected male not found in the pedigree .
In this analysis , each allele was amplified separately and then mixed ( VI-O + VI-N ) .
( Right ) Confirmation of carrier status by heteroduplex formation .
In this analysis , DNA from either VI-N or VI-O was mixed with females VII-B or VI-L before amplification .
The amplified products were subjected to heteroduplex formation as described in Methods , and VII-B , but not VI-L , was confirmed to be a carrier .
Note that mixing experiments are not necessary in those females who are heterozygous at this locus since heteroduplexes form from the two different alleles already present .
y. gene , and the DXS458 locus were examined in available members of the XCID pedigree ( Fig .
6 ) .
Recombination events were seen between the disease locus and the AR gene , but not the DXS458 locus , or the y , gene .
Two other affected males ( data not shown ) also shared the same y , gene allele as the three males shown .
Heteroduplex analysis was used to determine the occurrence of the disease-associated allele in each affected male and certain suspected carriers .
Chromosomal assignments of the alleles in females were made on the basis of least numbers of recombination events and contributions of the paternal chromo-somes .
This analysis allowed prediction of the carrier status of these individuals ( Fig .
6 ) .
Discussion The discovery of the defect in the y , gene in XSCID ( 9 ) provided an opportunity to test whether a defect in the same gene was responsible for XCID .
Single stranded conformational polymorphisms were sought in intron 1 and intron 2 of the y. , gene in the XCID kindred .
This analysis was uninformative . ``
Further evidence for allelic difference in intron 1 was examined by heteroduplex analysis .
Mixing experiments between the DNA from an affected and unaffected brother demonstrated heteroduplex formation .
This strongly suggested that allelic differences were present in the y , gene from these two individuals .
Further genetic analysis employing mixing experiments between these two males and other individuals from the XCID pedigree was consistent with linkage of the disease to the y , gene .
Two flanking loci , the AR gene and the DXS458 loci ( 4 , 5 ) , were also examined in this family .
Although limited recombination events were detected , the data suggested linkage to these loci as well .
These findings led to the sequencing of the y , gene in one of the affected males and his unaffected brother .
A missense mutation in exon 7 ( 10 , 19 ) ( leucine 271-glutamine ) was found in patient VI-O , but not in his normal brother ( VI-N ) .
The same missense mutation was subsequently found in two other affected males ( V-F and VI-A ) .
Moderate X-linked Combined Immunodeficiency 1171 sp MSR cytoplasmic 5 | extracellular domain _| | domain ’ J Ln I CCC ) - .
| yas 3 £ possible | | | wap e g Figure 5 .
Missense mutation in exon 7 of the y , gene leucine ; -- « we .
P ; A zipper same __ ss » ___ A > * _ found in XCID .
( A4 ) The missense mutation results in WSXWS motif - | Tae _ wake __ | _ the replacement of leucine 271 by a glutamine .
This i m *~ ~ *~ - : mutanfm is in the SH2 sudemam homology region Leucine 271 -- > Glutamine | `` nung , * aus found in the y , gene .
Interestingly , Leu 271 corresponds i ‘ L cage `` « en `` * `` to an isoleucine in the murine y , sequence ( 30 ) .
( B ) PRIPTLKNLEDLVTEYHGNFSAWSGVSKGLAESL SH2-subdomain homologies The site of the mutation in the y , gene in this more moderate combined immunodeficiency is distinct from previously published defects in this gene associated with XSCID .
In XSCID , premature stop codons , presumably resulting in truncated pro-teins , were reported ( 9 ) .
In contrast , the missense mutation associated with XCID is in the first of two SH2 subdomain homology regions of the cytoplasmic portion of the molecule ( 10 , 19 ) .
Although high affinity IL-2R would be expected to form , the amino acid substitution in a phosphopeptide binding domain suggests that this error causes a defective association of this receptor with proteins important in intracellular signaling .
Recent evidence in favor of this speculation was obtained re IV IV v v mn 9 hil i 3 vil vil C 1 s Figure 6 .
Genetic Analysis of XCID .
Polymorphisms in the AR gene , y. gene , and the DXS458 locus were examined in the XCID pedigree .
Alleles were assigned as arbitrary numbers for the AR gene ( top number and the DXS458 locus ( bottom number ) , respectively .
Alleles were assigned to the maternal or paternal X chromosomes according to the most probably inheritance patterns .
The status of the y , gene was designated as + or - based on heteroduplex analysis .
It is possible that more than two alleles are involved in this pedigree .
In this analysis , ( + ) means only that the amplified segment from intron 1 does not form a heteroduplex with DNA from an affected male ( VI-O ) and therefore is the same allele , whereas ( - ) indicates that a heteroduplex is formed .
In the case of heterozygous females that were obligate carriers , no mixing experiments were conducted since heteroduplexes formed from the two different autologous alleles .
A recombination event involving the region of the X chromosome containing the AR gene , but not the DXS $ 458 locus or the y , gene was observed in one affected male ( VI-O ) .
The asterisk at VI-L denotes nonrandom X-inactivation without carrier status .
This finding most likely represents skewed X-inactivation that is found occasionally in normal femalFs .
1172 Schmalstieg et al .
e A portion of the sequencing gel illustrating the mutation is shown .
The sequence shown is complementary to that of the coding strand .
The substitution AT was demonstrated in the patient VI-O , but not in his normal brother .
garding the association of JAK-3 , a member of the Janus family of protein tyrosine kinases , with y .
( 20 ) .
The status of X chromosome inactivation is also of interest in this disease .
Investigations of X chromosome inactivation in female carriers of X-linked immunodeficiency diseases have been useful both in detecting carriers ( 6 , 7 , 8 ) and in understanding the basis of some of those defects ( 21-23 ) .
It is assumed that nonrandom X chromosome inactivation arises from a survival or production disadvantage of cells in which the defective X chromosome is the active one ( 6 , 21 ) .
In that regard , there is preferential use of the paternal X chromosome in T cells and B cells in most female carriers of XSCID ( 7 , 24 ) .
Furthermore , a preferential use of the paternal X chromosome in blood leukocytes from carrier females of an XSCID variant has also been reported ( 25 ) .
In this study , we used the STR , ( CAG ) , , in the androgen receptor gene , which is differentially methylated in active and inactive X chromosomes ( 4 , 5 ) .
Obligate female carriers of this novel XCID were heterozygous and had patterns consistent with nonrandom X chromosome inactivation in T cells , B cells , and variable X chromosome inactivation in PMNs with the exception of one carrier female .
This individual , surprisingly , utilized the paternal X chromosome for T cells and the maternal X chromosome for B cells and PMNs .
One possibility for this finding is that she had a spontaneous mutation in the ' `` unaf-fected `` X chromosome that produced a second defect that was disadvantageous for the survival or production of B cells and PMNs .
It seems more likely that skewed lyonization towards the maternal X chromosome occurred in this carrier ( 26 ) .
In this scenario , a preponderance of precursor cells would utilize the maternal X chromosome as the active one .
This preponderance would overcome the disadvantage this chromosome ordinarily confers on the production or survival of B cells .
Only T cells of paternal origin would be seen because the gene defect is more lethal for T cells .
Although the chromosome carrying the gene defect for XCID was presumably employed for both B cells and PMNs , no defect in function was detected for either cell type ( data not shown ) .
Therefore , this finding suggests that although the gene defect responsible for XCID affects the production or survival of both B and T cells , the chief effect is directed at T cell function .
This does not preclude more subtle defects in B cell function .
In summary , patients with XCID demonstrate a point mutation in the gene that codes for the intracellular portion of the y. protein .
This newly recognized mutation promises to provide new insights into the function of the IL-2R y chain .
The explanation for the disparate clinical findings in XCID and XSCID remains an important question .
There is a precedent in that very different symptomatology also results from specific mutations in the B cell tyrosine kinase gene in human X-linked agammaglobulinemia and CBA/N mice ( 27 , 28 ) .
However , because y , is not only a part of the IL-2R ( 9 , 10 , 19 , 29 ) , but also a constituent of the IL-4 ( 30 ) , IL-7 ( 31 , 32 ) , IL-9 ( 20 ) , and IL-15 ( 33 ) receptors , the task of unraveling the molecular patho-genesis of the resultant immunodeficiencies in this XCID will be complex .
However , since mature T and B cells may be obtained from the affected males , and transgenic animals with the disease mutation may be constructed , it may be possible in the near future to understand further the consequences of this defect upon the development and function of the immune system .
Acknowledgments We thank Mary Douglas for her kind assistance in preparing the B-lymphoblastoid cell lines , and Dr. O. Wesley McBride for critical comments .
We also thank Dr. A. P. Lookingbill , Dr. H. M. Rosenblatt , and Dr. R. Kelly for their clinical assistance with these patients .
This work was supported in part by the John Sealy Memorial Endowment to the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston , Texas .
References 1 .
Brooks , E. G. , F. C. Schmaistieg , D. P. Wirt , H. M. Rosenblatt , L. T. Adkins , D. P. Lookingbill , H. E. Rudloff , T. A. Rakusan , and A. S. Goldman .
1990 .
A novel X-linked combined immunodeficiency disease .
J. Clin .
Invest .
86:1623-1631 .
2 .
Schmalstieg , F. C. , D. P. Wirt , L. T. Adkins , E. G. Brooks , S. D. Stansberry , L. E. Swischuk , and A. S. Goldman .
1992 .
Postnatal development of T lymphocytes in a novel X-linked immunodeficiency disease .
Clin .
Immunol .
Immunopa-thol .
64:71 3 .
Goldman , A. S. , K. H. Palkowetz , H. E. Rudloff , E. G. Brooks , and F. C. Schmalstieg .
1992 .
Repertoire of Va and V/ regions of T cell antigen receptors on CD4+ and CD8+ peripheral blood T cells in a novel X-linked combined immunodeficiency disease .
Eur .
J. Immunol .
22:1103-1106 .
4 .
La-Spada , A. R. , E. M. Wilson , D. B. Lubahn , A. E. Harding , and K. H. Fischbeck .
1991 .
Androgen receptor gene mutations in X-linked spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy .
Nature ( Lond . )
.
352:77-79 .
5 .
Allen , R. C. , H. Y. Zoghbi , A .
B. Moseley , H. M. Rosenblatt , and J. W. Belmont .
1992 .
Methylation of Hpall and Hhal sites near the polymorphic CAG repeat in the human androgen-receptor gene correlates with X chromosome inactivation .
Am .
J. Hum .
Genet .
51:1229-1239 .
6 .
Conley , M. E. , A. Lavoie , C. Briggs , P. Brown , C. Guerra , and J. M. Puck .
1988 .
Nonrandom X chromosome inactivation in B cells from carriers of X chromosome-linked severe combined immunodeficiency .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA .
85:3090-3094 .
7 .
Puck , J. M. , R. L. Nussbaum , and M. E. Conley .
1987 .
Carrier detection in X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency based on patterns of X chromosome inactivation .
J. Clin .
Invest .
79:1395-1400 .
8 .
Puck , J. M. , C. C. Stewart , and R. L. Nussbaum .
1992 .
Maximum-likelihood analysis of human T-cell X chromosome inactivation patterns : normal women versus carriers of X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency .
Am .
J. Hum .
Genet .
50:742-748 .
9 .
Noguchi , M. , H. Yi , H. M. Rosenblatt , A. H. Filipovich , S. Adelstein , W. S. Modi , W. McBride O , and W. J. Leonard .
1993 .
Interleukin-2 receptor y chain mutation results in X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency in humans .
Cell .
73:147-157 .
10 .
Noguchi , M. , S. Adelstein , X. Cao , and W. J. Leonard .
1993 .
Characterization of the human interleukin-2 receptor y chain gene .
J. Biol .
Chem .
268:13601-13608 .
11 .
Weber , J. L. , A. E. Kwitek , P. E. May , M. H. Polymeropoulos , and S. Ledbetter .
1990 .
Dinucleotide repeat polymorphisms at the DXS453 , DXS454 , and DXS458 loci .
Nucleic Acids Res .
18:4037 .
12 .
Edwards , A. , H. A. Hammond , L. Hin , C. T. Caskey , and R. Chakraborty .
1992 .
Genetic variation at five trimeric and tetrameric tandem repeat loci in four human population groups .
Genomics .
12:241-253 .
13 .
Boyum , A .
1968 .
Isolation of mononuclear cells and granulocytes from human blood .
Scand .
J. Clin .
Lab .
Invest .
21 ( suppl .
97 ) :77-89 .
14 .
Manyonda , I. T. , A. J. Soltys , and F. C. Hay .
1992 .
A critical evaluation of the magnetic cell sorter and its use in the positive and negative selection of CD4SRO+ cells .
J. Immunol .
Methods .
149:1-10 .
15 .
Straub , C. , and R. H. Zubler .
1989 .
Immortalization of EBV-infected B cells is not influenced by exogenous signals acting on B cell proliferation .
Effects of mutant EL-4 thymoma cells and transforming growth factor-beta .
J. Immunol .
142:87-93 .
16 .
Sambrook , J. , E. F. Fritsch , and T. Maniatis .
1989 .
Molecular Cloning : A Laboratory Manual .
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , Cold Spring Harbor , NY .
17 .
Vogelstein , B. , E. R. Fearon , S. R. Hamilton , A. C. Preisinger , H. F. Willard , A. M. Michelson , A. D. Riggs , and S. H. Orkin .
1987 .
Clonal analysis using recombinant DNA probes from the X-chromosome .
Cancer Res .
47:4806-4813 .
18 .
Huang , T. H. , R. W. Cottingham , Jr. , D. H. Ledbetter , and H. Y. Zoghbi .
1992 .
Genetic mapping of four dinucleotide repeat loci , DXS453 , DXS458 , DXS $ 454 , and DXS424 , on the X chromosome using multiplex polymerase chain reaction .
Genomics .
13:375-380 .
19 .
Takeshita , T. , H. Asao , K. Ohtani , N. Ishii , S. Kumaki , N. Tanaka , H. Munakata , M. Nakamura , and K. Sugamura .
1992 .
Cloning of the y chain of the human IL-2 receptor .
Science ( Wash. DC ) .
257:379-382 .
20 .
Russell , S. M. , J .
A. Johnston , M. Noguchi , M. Kawamura , C. M. Bacon , M. Friedman , M. Berg , D. W. McVicar , B .
A. Witthuhn , O. Silvennoinen , and A. S. Goldman , F. C. Schmalstieg , J. N. Thle , J. J. O'Shea , and W. J. Leonard .
1994 .
Interaction of IL-2 receptor 3 and y , chains with JAK1 and JAK3 , respec-tively : defective y , -JAK3 association in XSCID .
Science ( Wash. DC ) .
266:1042-1044 .
21. Cooper , M. D. , and A. R. Lawton .
1972 .
Circulating B-cells in patients with immunodeficiency .
Am .
J. Pathol .
69:513-528 .
22 .
Vetrie , D. , I. Vorechovsky , P. Sideras , J. Holland , A. Davies , F. Flinter , L. Hammarstrom , C. Kinnon , R. Levinsky , M. Bobrow , C. I. E. Smith , and D. R. Bentley .
1993 .
The gene involved in X-linked agammaglobulinaemia is a member of the src family of protein-tyrosine .
Nature ( Lond . )
.
361:226-233 .
23 .
Tsukada , S. , D. C. Saffran , D. J. Rawlings , O. Parolini , R. C. Allen , I. Klisak , R. S. Sparkes , H. Kubagawa , T. Mohandas , S. Quan , J. W. Belmont , M. D. Cooper , M. E. Conley , and O. N. Witte .
1993 .
Deficient expression of a B cell cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase in human X-linked agammaglobulinemia .
Cell .
72:279-290 .
24 .
Conley , M. E. , and J. M. Puck .
1988 .
Definition of the gene loci in X-linked immunodeficiencies .
Immunol .
Invest .
17:425-463 .
25. de Saint-Basile , G. , F. Le-Deist , M. Caniglia , Y. Lebranchu , C. Griscelli , and A. Fischer .
1992 .
Genetic study of a new X-linked recessive immunodeficiency syndrome .
J. Clin .
Invest .
89:861~-866 .
26 .
Gale , R. E. , H. Wheadon , and D. C. Linch .
1991 .
X-chromosome inactivation patterns using HPRT and PGK polymorphisms in haematologically normal and post-chemotherapy females .
Br .
J. Haematol .
79:193-197 .
27 .
Thomas , J. P. , P. Sideras , C. I. E. Smith , I. Vorechovsky , V. Chapman , and W. E. Paul .
1993 .
X-linked agammaglobulinemia and X-linked immunodeficiency genes .
Science ( Wash. DC ) .
261:355-358 .
28 .
Rawlings , J. D. , D. C. Saffran , S. Tsukada , D. A. Largaespada , F. C. Grimaldi , L. Cohen , R. N. Mohr , J. F. Bazan , M. Howard , N. G. Copeland , N. A. Jenkins , and O. N. Wittig .
1993 .
Mutation of unique region of Bruton 's tyrosine kinase in immunodeficient XID mice .
Science ( Wash. DC ) .
261:358-361 .
29 .
Cao , X. , C. A. Kozak , Y. J. Liu , M. Noguchi , E. O'Connell , W. J. Leonard .
1993 .
Characterization of cDNAs encoding the murine interleukin 2 receptor ( IL-2R ) y chain : chromosomal mapping and tissue specificity of IL-2R y chain expression .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA .
90:8464-8468 .
30 .
Kondo , M. , T. Takeshita , N. Ishii , M. Nakamura , S. Watanabe , K. Arai , and K. Sugamura .
1993 .
Sharing of the interleukin-2 ( IL-2 ) receptor y chain between receptors for IL-2 and IL-4 .
Science ( Wash. DC ) .
262:1874-1877 .
31 .
Noguchi , M. , Y. Nakamura , S. M. Russell , S. F. Ziegler , M. Tsang , X. Cao , and W. J. Leonard .
1993 .
Interleukin-2 receptor -y chain : a functional component of the interleukin-7 .
Science ( Wash. DC ) .
262:1877-1880 .
32 .
Kondo , M. , T. Takeshita , M. Higuchi , M. Nakamura , T. Sudo , S. Nishi-kawa , and K. Sugamura .
1994 .
Functional participation of the IL-2 receptor y chain in IL-7 receptor complexes .
Science ( Wash. DC ) .
263:1453-1454 .
33 .
Giri , J. G. , M. Ahdleh , J. Eisenman , K. Shanebeck , S. Grabstein , A. Kumake , L. Nmaen , S. Park , D. Cosman , and D. Anderson .
1994 .
Utilization of the 3 and y chains of the IL-2 receptor by the novel cytokine IL-15 .
EMBO ( Eur .
Mol .
Biol .
Organ . )
J .
13:2822-2830 .
Moderate X-linked Combined Immunodeficiency 1173
