MoLECULAR AND CELLULAR BroLoGy , Oct. 1995 , p. 5707-5715 0270-7306/95/ $ 04.00+0 Copyright © 1995 , American Society for Microbiology Vol .
15 , No .
10 A Central Role for a Single c-Myb Binding Site in a Thymic Locus Control Region KEVIN C. ESS , `` TERESA L. WHITAKER , `` GREGORY J .
COST , `` DAVID P. WITTE , `` JOHN J. HUTTON , !
AND BRUCE J .
ARONOW !
* Department of Pediatrics and Department of Pathology , `` Division of Basic Science Research , Program in Developmental Biology , Children 's Hospital Medical Center , University of Cincinnati , Cincinnati , Ohio 45229 Received 4 April 1995/Returned for modification 19 May 1995/Accepted 23 June 1995 Locus control regions ( LCRs ) are powerful assemblies of cis elements that organize the actions of cell-type-specific trans-acting factors .
A 2.3-kb LCR in the human adenosine deaminase ( ADA ) gene first intron , which controls expression in thymocytes , is composed of a 200-bp enhancer domain and extended flanking sequences that facilitate activation from within chromatin .
Prior analyses have demonstrated that the enhancer contains a 28-bp core region and local adjacent augmentative cis elements .
We now show that the core contains a single critical c-Myb binding site .
In both transiently cotransfected human cells and stable chromatin-integrated yeast cells , c-Myb strongly transactivated reporter constructs that contained polymerized core sequences .
c-Myb protein was strongly evident in T lymphoblasts in which the enhancer was active and was localized within discrete nuclear structures .
Fetal murine thymus exhibited a striking concordance of endogenous c-myh expression with that of mouse ADA and human ADA LCR-directed transgene expression .
Point mutation of the c-Myb site within the intact 2.3-kb LCR severely attenuated enhancer activity in transfections and LCR activity in transgenic thymocytes .
Within the context of a complex enhancer and LCR , c-Myb can act as an organizer of thymocyte-specific gene expression via a single binding site .
Cellular differentiation requires developmental gene regulation that results from the combined actions of multiple transcriptional factors acting on clustered cis elements within enhancers and promoters .
The most powerful clusters of cis elements are locus control regions ( LCRs ) that dictate chromatin structure transitions and factor accessibility and organize multiple transcription factor interactions ( 3 , 7 , 11 , 30 ) .
LCRs seem generally composed of classical enhancer segments and additional sequences required for activation in chromatin .
Individual factor binding sites of enhancers frequently appear to be dispensable in transfection assays , consistent with a view of enhancers as being composed of a series of redundant binding sites with overlapping functions .
Few studies in transgenic mice have addressed the role of individual enhancer elements within the context of intact LCRs .
However , available data suggest that individual sites tend not to be required for position-independent transgene expression ( 7 ) .
Consequently , we have limited insight into the process by which individual cis-regulatory elements within LCRs participate in chromatin activation and the determination of transcription rates and cell type specificity .
LCRs appear to become active in a stepwise fashion ( 2 , 16 , 20 ) .
A likely early event is a structural transition of chromatin to an accessible state , followed by the formation of a distinct chromatin structure that is hypersensitive to DNase I .
As a result of this process , it is a striking feature of cells in which an LCR is active that there is a remarkable cell-to-cell uniformity of mRNA production .
This is evident for both endogenous genes and transgenes on a per-copy basis .
Most presently characterized LCRs are from genes that express prodigious levels of mRNA in target cells ( e.g .
, -globin , immunoglobulin heavy-chain , and serum albumin genes ) .
The human adenosine deaminase ( ADA ) gene , which contains a * Corresponding author .
Phone : ( 513 ) 559-4865 .
Fax : ( 513 ) 559-4317 .
Electronic mail address : bruce.aronow @ uc.edu .
5707 2.3-kb thymic LCR , differs from the above-cited examples in that it directs considerably lower levels of mRNA .
ADA is expressed in cortical thymocytes , in which T-cell receptor re-arrangement , positive selection , and negative selection occur .
The vast majority of cortical T cells normally do not mature and undergo programmed cell death ( 28 ) .
When thymocyte DNA is degraded during programmed cell death ( 34 ) , ADA is essential for purine catabolism , as its genetic absence causes a failure to develop cortical thymocytes .
Deletional analyses in transfected T cells have identified a classical enhancer that encompasses a 200-bp domain corresponding to a thymocyte-specific DNase I-hypersensitive region centered within the 2.3-kb intronic thymic LCR .
Flanking the 200-bp enhancer region are extended segments required for insertion site-independent and copy number-proportional transgene expression ( 2 , 3 ) .
Using transiently transfected T cells , deletional analyses have indicated that the 200-bp enhancer region is hierarchically structured , composed of a 28-bp core and augmentative flanking elements .
We now report a series of experiments demonstrating that c-Myb protein binds to a site within the core enhancer element , functions as a transcriptional activator within multiple cell types , initiates transcriptional activity from within yeast chromatin , and is present in thymocytic T cells within discrete subnuclear structures .
Within the context of the intact LCR , point mutation of the c-Myb site strongly disables enhancer activity in transiently transfected T cells .
Thymocytes in five of six transgenic lines with the c-Myb site mutation exhibited very poor LCR function .
These data demonstrate a critical role for c-Myb in cortical thymocyte gene expression and suggest that complex regulatory domains such as LCRs can be organized around single sites .
MATERIALS AND METHODS c-Myb protein .
A glutathione S-transferase ( GST ) -truncated c-Myb fusion protein ( GSTmyb-0.7 ) was made to avoid protein degradation observed in bac- 5708 ESS ET AL .
teria that contained full-length c-Myb expression vectors .
To do this , a 721-bp Ncol-Hincll fragment of pMbm-1 ( 37 ) encoding the c-Myb DNA binding domain was subcloned into pGEX4T-2 ( Pharmacia ) to produce pGSTmyb-0.7 in host Escherichia coli DHS « cells ( Gibco/BRL ) .
Midlog cultures were induced with 0.1 mM isopropylthiogalactopyranoside ( IPTG ) for 3 h and fusion protein was purified according to the manufacturer 's recommendations .
The DNA binding domain of c-Myb has been shown to retain the specificity of full-length c-Myb for target sequences ( 29 ) .
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay .
Two microliters of eluate from glutathi-one-Sepharose representing approximately 50 ng of fusion protein ( as judged from silver stain intensity ) was incubated with labeled and unlabeled oligonucleotides in a total volume of 25 pl that contained 10 mM Tris , 50 mM NaCl , 5 mM dithiothreitol , 1 mM EDTA , 4 mM MgCl , , 50 ng of poly ( dI-dC ) , and 10 % glycerol for 30 min at room temperature .
The reaction mixture was electrophoresed without the addition of dye on a 5 % acrylamide-0.25 % Tris-borate-EDTA gel , dried , and exposed to film .
Cell culture , transient transfections , and CAT assay .
Molt-4 , CCRF-CEM , and Raji lymphoid cells , culture conditions , DEAFE-dextran transfections , and chloramphenicol acetyltransferase ( CAT ) assays have been previously described , as have ADA core element reporter constructs ( 3 ) .
Electroporation of Raji cells was done essentially by the procedure of Bhaumik et al .
( 5 ) .
Briefly , for each transfection , 10 `` cells in exponential growth were washed with 1X phosphate-buffered saline ( PBS ) and resuspended in 0.3 ml of PBS containing 7.5 % fetal bovine serum .
Cells were added to 0.4-cm Bio-Rad cuvettes containing transfection DNA , briefly mixed , and electroporated at 260 V and 960 wF in a Bio-Rad Gene Pulser .
Cells were immediately plated in 12 ml of RPMI medium supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum , 2 mM L-glutamine , and 100 U of penicillin-streptomycin ( Gibco/BRL ) per ml .
Cells were harvested 45 to 48 h later for assay of CAT activity .
Yeast strains , reporter genes , and expression plasmids .
Saccharomyces cerevi-sige W303-1A ( MATacan1-100 his3-11,15 leu2-3,112 trpl-1 ura3-1 ade2-1 ) was used as a host for reporter constructions and subsequently transformed with expression plasmids .
Yeast reporter plasmids that integrated into the URA3 locus were made with ADA core sequences by inserting corresponding oligonucleotides immediately upstream of a GAL ] TATA yeast promoter and lacZ reporter gene designated pLR1deltaldelta2p ( 36 ) .
RC , R1 , and R7 oligonucleotides were ligation multimerized into the Xhol site of this plasmid , which was then linearized at Stul and transformed into strain W303-1A by the lithium acetate proto-col. For each clone , the reporter gene structure was confirmed by Southern blot hybridization .
Integrant clones were grown overnight in YEPD medium and transformed with yeast vectors that expressed either wild-type c-Myb ( CCC ) , a C-terminal truncation ( CCd ) , or an N-terminal truncation ( dCC ) .
c-Myb trun-cations correspond closely to those observed in v-Myb .
Control yeast reporter strains containing known c-Myb-responsive mim-1A-LacZ reporter genes YSW5 ( + ) ( wild type ) and YSMS5 ( + ) ( myb site mutated ) were generously provided by Rui-Hong Chen and Joseph Lipsick .
All expression vectors were provided by Rui-Hong Chen and minimally contained c-Myb DNA binding and transactivation domains in addition to the 2 wm replication origin and TRP ] selectable marker .
Transformants were screened for B-galactosidase activity with the 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-B-p-galactopyranoside ( X-Gal ) filter assay as described by Chen and Lipsick ( 8 ) .
Three representative clones per construct were isolated and subjected to quantitative determination of B-galactosidase activity , using liquid cultures grown to an optical density at 600 nm of 1.0 and the substrate orthonitrophenyl-B-p-galactopyranoside .
B-Galactosidase units were calculated by the method of Miller ( 25 ) .
Assays were done in duplicate , with three independent clones assayed per construct .
Reproducibility was within 20 % .
Northern ( RNA ) and in situ hybridizations .
Total RNA was purified by using Tri-Reagent ( 9 ) .
For Northern analysis , a 0.6-kb HindIII-EcoRI fragment from pRSVmyb ( 10 ) was labeled by the random primer method ( Bethesda Research Laboratories ) .
For e-myb in situ hybridization , the same 0.6-kb fragment subcloned in pBluescript was linearized with HindIII and labeled with [ a-*°SJUTP .
Mouse ADA and CAT in situ probes as well as mouse embryos and tissues were prepared for cryosectioning and subjected to in situ hybridization analysis as previously described ( 1 , 3 ) .
Western blotting ( immunoblotting ) .
A total of 3.3 X 10° cells were centrifuged and resuspended in 2 % sodium dodecyl sulfate ( SDS ) loading buffer .
After boiling , samples were electrophoresed on an SDS-7 % polyacrylamide gel and transferred to an Immobilon-P membrane ( Millipore ) .
An anti-mouse c-Myb type I monoclonal antibody that cross-reacts with human c-Myb ( Upstate Bio-technology , Inc. , Lake Placid , N.Y. ) was incubated 4°C overnight at 0.4 pg/ml .
The secondary antibody was an anti-mouse horseradish peroxidase conjugate ; bound antibody complexes were visualized with the Amersham enhanced chemi-luminescence system .
Immunofluorescence localization of c-Myb .
A total of 3 X 10° cells were washed in PBS , cytocentrifuged onto glass slides , and fixed with acetone .
Non-specific binding sites were blocked with PBS that contained 1 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) , 5 % nonfat milk , and 3 drops of normal rabbit serum per 10 ml .
An anti-mouse c-Myb type I monoclonal antibody at 50 pg/ml in 1 % PBS-1 % BSA was allowed to interact with cells for 1 h at 37°C .
After a wash in PBS-1 % BSA , a rabbit anti-mouse F ( ab ' ) , fluorescein-conjugated secondary antibody was added , and the mixture was incubated for 60 min at 37°C .
After three washes , slide covers were affixed with Antifade medium ( Oncor ) containing propidium Mor .
CELL .
BioL .
a DNAse I HS 's 9.J $ ko ADA t UH WY 3 : i -- HH -- H -- -E GENE F 2 3 0 4006 7 1012 Bs It _ enhancer HS II domain ie 3LEbF ; z- .
_- i_ Facilitator ___| ° SphI `` 25 IMCFc SphI _-_ ADA-NF 127 ENHANCER _ APRC _ TTGACTCACATGGCAGTTGGTGGTGGAGGGGAACAA AP-1 c-myb MAZ RC 00 RL 0 R7 < == APRC GSTmyb 0.7 ~ > - WHY Wo Wihtwih FIG .
1 .
( a ) Structure of the human ADA gene , including a 2.3-kb fragment LCR , DNase I-hypersensitive sites ( HS 's ) II and III , enhancer core sequences , ADA-NF1 and ADA-NF2 binding sites , and introduced point mutations R1 and R7 .
The 9-bp c-Myb consensus and adjacent AP-1 sites are under-lined .
( b ) Electrophoretic mobility shift assay of labeled APRC and purified GSTmyb-0.7 fusion protein .
The major shifted complex of APRC and GSTmyb-0.7 is indicated ( arrow ) .
Competition with unlabeled oligonucleotide , indicated as concentration ramps , was performed with 10- , 40- , and 160-fold molar ex-cesses .
Lane 1 is APRC probe only .
GST protein alone failed to show any specific binding ( data not shown ) .
iodide for nucleic acid staining .
Bound antibody complexes were visualized with an Olympus 100 % PlanApo oil objective and photographed with Ektar 100 film .
Site-directed mutagenesis and transgenic mice .
A mutagenic oligonucleotide was used to alter the ADA-NFI1 site within the 2.3-kb Sph1-Sph1 fragment from the first intron of ADA , using the pAlter vector kit ( Promega Altered Sites ) .
The mutation was confirmed by double-stranded sequencing and subcloned into the ADA CAT reporter 5'acba ( 3 ) to yield plasmid I 2.3 R7 CAT .
The transgene fragment was isolated from this plasmid and used to generate independent transgenic mouse lines .
F , progeny were characterized for transgene integrity , copy number , and CAT expression as previously described ( 3 ) .
RESULTS Natural occurrence of an in vitro-identified c-Myb binding site .
By the selection of random sequences in vitro , Howe and Watson ( 19 ) derived a 9-bp consensus sequence for c-Myb binding , not previously identified in vivo , that is present within the core of the ADA enhancer ( Fig .
1a ) .
To determine directly if ADA core element sequences bind to c-Myb , an electrophoretic mobility shift assay was performed with the DNA binding domain of human c-Myb protein .
The major complex formed between c-Myb and the APRC extended core fragment ( Fig .
1b ) was effectively competed for by an unlabeled APRC or RC oligonucleotide .
APRC includes the 28-bp RC core and an adjacent AP-1 site , which evidently was not required for c-Myb binding .
Within the RC core , two binding sites , ADA-NF1 and ADA-NF2 , have been previously defined .
Both sites are essential for the ability of the polymerized core element to Vou .
15 , 1995 aa .
ame sam - se * 0 * ¢ o a 6 6 6 6 6 o 147 5 12 2 E $ 1 2 197 0 1 o 1 & 87 > 1 2 1 § g 3 1 9 1 < 4 43 i- ] < 4 ] o - 2-7 o-Reporter : ADA-RC ADA-RC ADA-R1i ADA-R1 ADA-R7 ADA-R7 Effector : - -- pRSVmyb _ - __ pRSVmyb - __ pRSVmyb FIG .
2. c-Myb transactivates ADA core element CAT reporters in transiently cotransfected Raji B cells .
A total of 10 `` cells were cotransfected by electroporation with 15 pg of expression vector pRSVmyb and 7.5 ug of ADA CAT reporter plasmid that contained four copies of the RC , R1 , or R7 element .
Duplicate datum points are shown from one representative experiment ; very similar results have been obtained in at least five independent experiments .
Conversion of [ **C ] chloramphenicol to monoacetylated product was quantitated on a PhosphorImager by using ImageQuant software ( Molecular Dynamics ) .
act as an enhancer in transfected Molt-4 cells .
To test for the site specificity of c-Myb interaction , two oligonucleotides with point mutations in either the ADA-NF1 or ADA-NF2 site were used as competitors .
Mutation at the ADA-NF1 site ( APR7 ) prevented competition for c-Myb protein binding .
However , mutation at the ADA-NF2 site ( APR1 ) allowed competition indistinguishable from that of wild-type APRC .
Thus , these results identify c-Myb as a protein which binds in vitro to the ADA-NF1 site .
c-Myb transactivates ADA enhancer sequences in lymphoid cells .
The in vitro analysis described above indicates that c-Myb protein can bind to the ADA-NF1 site but does not address its ability to bind and transactivate within a cell .
Raji B cells were cotransfected with pRSVmyb and CAT reporter construct ADA-RC , which contained four tandem copies of the RC core oligonucleotide placed downstream of a 4-kb human ADA promoter and a CAT reporter gene .
Raji cells express minimal ADA and exhibit no transactivation from the thymic enhancer or polymerized core element ( 3 ) .
c-Myb re-producibly transactivated ADA-RC approximately 30-fold over the value for the reporter alone ( Fig .
2 ) .
Control transfections using of a version of c-Myb with the transactivation domain deleted ( 10 ) nearly eliminated transactivation of ADA-RC ( results not shown ) .
Cotransfection was also performed with pRSVmyb and ADA CAT reporter plasmids that contained polymerized oligonucleotides with mutated sites for ADA-NF1 ( ADA-R7 ) or ADA-NF2 ( ADA-R1 ) ( 3 ) .
ADA-NFI site mutation strongly diminished c-Myb transactivation , but mutation of the ADA-NF2 site had no effect on c-Myb transactivation .
Also , c-Myb failed to show any transactivation of the 4-kb ADA promoter alone ( data not shown ) .
These results demonstrate that c-Myb is competent to transactivate promoter activity via a minimal enhancer site .
c-Myb transactivates ADA enhancer sequences in yeast chromatin .
Endogenous enhancers and LCRs function within c-Myb , AN LCR DETERMINANT FACTOR 5709 FIG .
3. c-Myb transactivates chromatin-integrated ADA core elements in yeast cells .
c-Myb expression vectors CCC , CCd , and dCC were introduced as 2 m plasmids ( p ) in yeast strains containing lacZ reporter constructs mim-1A wt , mim-1A mut , ADA-RC , ADA-R1 , and ADA-R7 integrated at the URA3 locus .
For all constructions , the putative myb response elements were placed immediately 5 ' of the yeast TATA element .
The parental TATA-lacZ reporter contains promoter-only sequences and had very low activity under all conditions .
B-Galactosidase ( -gal ) units were determined by the method of Miller ( 25 ) .
Values represent the averages of three independent transformant clones .
Three independent experiments showed highly reproducible activation profiles .
cop .
, copies .
the context of chromatin , which may be considerably less permissive for transactivation than transiently transfected plasmids .
However , we have shown that the function of the ADA LCR in chromatin is dependent on a series of architecturally constrained elements ( 2 ) .
To test c-Myb 's ability to transactivate from the isolated enhancer core in chromatin , ADA-RC lacZ reporter genes were constructed and integrated into the yeast genome .
We compared the ability of c-Myb to transactivate reporter strains containing wild-type and mutant ADA core elements with the known c-Myb-responsive element , mim-1A , as shown by Chen and Lipsick ( 8 ) .
We also evaluated N- and C-terminal truncated forms of c-Myb ( dCC and CCd , respectively ) to compare the relative roles of c-Myb terminal domains that may modulate transactivation from the ADA core element .
As shown in Fig .
3 , c-Myb strongly transactivated the four-copy ADA-RC element ( 60 % ) as well as the five-copy mim-1A reporter .
The three-copy ADA-R1 mutation was transactivated nearly as well as the ADA-RC mutation , but the ADA-R7 mutation caused a greater than 90 % loss of activity .
The mutated mim-1A site was apparently even more detrimental than the ADA-R7 mutation .
Overall , these results are corroborative of those observed in transient cotransfection assays and additionally indicate that c-Myb can recognize and transactivate from the ADA-NF1 site within the context of yeast chromatin .
N-terminal and C-terminal truncated c-Myb forms have been shown to transactivate from the mim-1A element as much as 60 to 70 % less than full-length c-Myb in yeast cells ( 8 ) .
We reproduced these results for the mim-1A element and 5710 ESS ET AL .
< ' o $ dis ' ig : s o E w- § 8 £ 92.5 cem aes kb 69 `` ae 2.8- _ FIG .
4 .
Expression of c-myb in human lymphoid cell lines .
( a ) Northern blot analysis .
Total cellular RNA ( 10 mg ) from Molt-4 , CEM , and Raji cells was electrophoresed , transferred , and probed with a human c-myb fragment .
The approximately 3.8-kb band appears equivalently expressed by Molt-4 and CEM cells but is absent in Raji cells .
Equal loading of RNA was evident by ethidium bromide staining intensity of rRNA bands .
( b ) Western blot analysis .
Whole cell extracts of Molt , CEM , and Raji cell lines were electrophoresed through an SDS-polyacrylamide gel , transferred to Immobilon-P , and incubated with a c-Myb monoclonal antibody ( type I ; Upstate Biotechnology ) followed by a see-ondary antibody conjugated to peroxidase .
Complexes were visualized by chemi-luminescence .
A single band , of approximately 75 kDa , corresponding to c-Myb protein can be detected in Molt-4 and CEM cells but not Raji cells .
showed for the ADA core element that C-terminal truncation of c-Myb ( CCd ) also caused reduced transactivation .
In contrast to mim-1A , the N-terminal truncated form of c-Myb ( dCC ) did not cause a decreased activation of the ADA-RC element in that it showed strong transactivation comparable to that of CCC .
The difference between the RC and mim-1A elements can not be due to the adjacent ADA-NF2 site because its mutation ( ADA-R1 ) also showed similar strong activation by both dCC and CCC .
These results imply that c-Myb interacts with the ADA core element differently than the mim-1A element .
Expression of c-myb mRNA and protein in lymphoid cell lines .
For c-Myb to activate the ADA gene in developing thymocytes , it must be present in the appropriate cells .
Molt-4 is an immature CD4* CD8* T-cell lymphoblastoid line that produces high amounts of ADA and strongly transactivates from the ADA core element .
CEM is a CD4* CD8~ cell line that expresses one-fifth as much ADA mRNA as Molt-4 and demonstrates a reduced response to the RC core ( 3 ) .
Raji B cells have less than 1 % as much ADA as Molt-4 cells and completely fail to transactivate the core element .
As shown by Northern and Western blot analyses ( Fig .
4 ) , Molt-4 and CEM lines both exhibit strong expression of c-Myb as a single band corresponding to 3.8-kb mRNA and a protein of 75 kDa , whereas Raji B-cells express no detectable c-Myb mRNA or protein .
Thus , equally high levels of c-Myb are present in the T-cell lines , suggesting that factors in addition to c-Myb are likely to determine the difference in core element enhancer strength in Molt-4 and CEM T cells .
c-Myb is localized in discrete subnuclear structures in lymphoid cells .
As c-Myb appears to be equivalently expressed in Molt-4 and CEM T cells , we sought to determine if a difference in the function of c-Myb between the two cell types might be the result of alternative interactions or its distribution within the cell .
When the c-Myb monoclonal antibody and a secondary fluorescein-conjugated antibody were used , c-Myb protein was largely localized to discrete , intensely labeled speckles present throughout the nuclei of Molt-4 and CEM cells ( Fig .
5 ) .
For most cells , from 15 to more than 50 speckles were evident .
However , occasional cells failed to show any c-Myb within their nuclei .
The nuclear morphology of these cells suggests that they are in M phase , consistent with the short Mor .
CELL .
BioL .
half-life and cell cycle regulation of c-Myb ( 23 , 35 ) .
CEM and Molt-4 cells did not appear to differ in their nuclear patterns , but some CEM cells appeared to have additional cytoplasmic signal , also present as discrete particles ( Fig .
5b ) .
Cytoplasmic signal in both Molt-4 and CEM cells is likely to be real because Raji cells , which lack c-Myb by both Northern or Western analyses , failed to show any background immunofluorescence staining ( results not shown ) .
Interestingly , a cytoplasmic c-Myb signal could be observed in a small fraction of Molt-4 or CEM cells that lacked a nuclear signal .
Also , there appeared to be some heterogeneity of signal in the cytoplasm , with both a finely dispersed fluorescence and the definite presence of speckles that appeared to be similar in size to those in the majority of the cell 's nuclei .
These observations are consistent with a cycle of c-Myb synthesis , assembly , trafficking , and degradation within T cells .
The intact enhancer requires the core c-Myb site for activity in transfected T cells .
Polymerization of individual cis elements often exaggerates their relative contribution and may not reflect their role or requirement within complex enhancers .
We therefore made reporter constructs that contained the 2.3-kb extended ADA enhancer with and without the 2-bp ADA-NF1 mutation .
In transiently transfected Molt-4 cells , I 2.3 R7 CAT had approximately 4 % as much CAT activity as the unmutated parental LCR reporter ( Fig .
6 ) .
Thus , the function of the intact enhancer was strongly dependent on the single c-Myb binding site .
This result supports previous hypotheses that elements within the central core region are es-sential , even when both flanking elements are intact .
LCR activity requires a c-Myb site for activity in transgenic mice .
Transient transfection analyses can exaggerate the importance of single elements and be insensitive to additional sites and factors responsible for activating gene expression in dynamic lineages of an intact animal .
We therefore sought to observe the importance of the ADA-NF1 c-Myb site in the context of the ADA LCR in transgenic mice .
The ADA LCR has been defined previously on the basis of its ability to generate position-independent transgene expression that is proportional to gene copy number ( 2 , 3 ) .
Six independent lines of I 2.3 R7 CAT mice were derived and analyzed for CAT reporter activity and gene copy number .
In all lines , CAT activity was consistently and considerably higher in the thymus than it was in the spleen , bone marrow , or liver ( data not shown ) .
Within the thymus , three lines exhibited less than 1 % of the expected CAT activity per gene copy , two lines exhibited approximately 10 % of the expected expression , and interestingly , one line exhibited essentially 100 % of the expected activity ( Table 1 ) .
The presence of the c-Myb mutation was confirmed in each of these lines , but in the high-expressing line 2 , Southern blot analysis indicated the presence of a nonconventional concatemeric array in which there were variable-size genomic insertions in half of the 20 transgene copies .
Overall , the data show that among independent transgenic lines containing the c-Myb site mutation , there is poor and inconsistent LCR function that is independent of gene copy number .
Thus , the mutation of the c-Myb site cripples the entire ADA LCR .
In situ hybridization analysis of e-myb , ADA , and CAT transgene expression .
To evaluate the potential of c-Myb to regulate the ADA LCR in vivo , we sought to determine and correlate the patterns of mouse c-Myb , mouse ADA , and human ADA CAT transgene expression .
Published analyses of the in vivo expression pattern of c-Myb in the mouse have been based only on Northern blot analyses and suggest that c-Myb is present at a high level in cortical thymocytes and bone marrow ( 32 ) but at a much lower level in most other tissues .
In situ hybridization analysis ( Fig .
7a ) of a gestational day 16 mouse Vou .
15 , 1995 c-Myb , AN LCR DETERMINANT FACTOR 5711 FIG .
5 .
Immunofluorescence localization of c-Myb in discrete subnuclear structures .
( a ) Molt-4 cells .
( b ) CEM cells .
Cells were cytospun onto slides , fixed for 10 min in acetone , air dried , and incubated with a c-Myb monoclonal antibody followed with a fluorescein-conjugated secondary antibody and Antifade mounting medium with propidium iodide .
Nuclear DNA appears red as a result of propidium iodide counterstaining , and fluorescein fluorescence appears green over the cytoplasm and yellow over the nuclear background .
Omission of the primary monoclonal antibody abolished immunostaining .
Raji cells exhibited no signal ( not shown ) .
5712 ESS ET AL .
to in 2 1.5 0 in Jig aa f a f ora a ae forall rua CAT Activity ( % Conversion ) o 123 CAT 12.3 RZ CAT FIG .
6 .
The 2.3-kb ADA enhancer domain requires a functional c-Myb site in transfected cells .
Molt-4 cells were transiently transfected with 5 ug of the 1 2.3 CAT or 1 2.3 R7 CAT reporter construct .
Data represent mean percent conversion of [ '*CJchloramphenicol ( + standard deviation ) from five experiments using two different preparations of DNA .
Percent conversion was determined with a PhosphorImager .
fetus reveals very strong c-myb expression in the cortical region of the thymus as well as its expected high expression in hematopoietic cells of the fetal liver .
Interestingly , there is also strong expression of c-myb in both tracheal and bronchial epithelial cells of the developing lung .
In contrast , there was very little expression of c-myb in nearly all other cell types , including medullary thymocytes .
In older animals , the thymic medulla becomes more prominent and c-myb expression remains confined entirely to the cortical cells ( results not shown ) .
This cortical-medullary distribution of c-Myb is identical to that of human and mouse ADA in the mature thymus ( 1 ) .
Expression of endogenous mouse ADA and ADA CAT transgene mRNAs was also analyzed in fetal mouse tissues by in situ hybridization .
Strikingly , CAT mRNA expressed by the wild-type ( 4/12 ADA CAT ) LCR transgene in day 16 fetuses was intensely expressed and localized to the thymus ( Fig .
7b ) , as was endogenous mouse ADA mRNA ( Fig .
7¢ ) .
Compared with the expression pattern of c-Myb , ADA and CAT mRNAs TABLE 1 .
Mutation of a single c-Myb site disables the ADA LCR in transgenic thymocytes `` Construct Mouse line Transgene Thy ?
!
” CAT copy no .
activity/copy 12.3 CAT 1 5 29,000 22 3 26,000 23 8 63,000 24 6 55,000 25 2 52,000 41 3 38,000 42 45 24,000 12.3 R7 CAT 2 20° 20,500 3 1 311 4 1 393 5 10 4,388 6 2 38 7 2 4,500 @ All mice analyzed were 5- to 10-week-old F , transgenic I 2.3 CAT mice as previously described ( for descriptions of lines 22 to 25 , 41 and 42 , see Fig .
8 of reference 3 ; data for line 1 are from Haynes and Wiginton [ 17a ] ) .
Transgene copy numbers were determined by quantitative Southern blotting using a PhosphorImager .
CAT activity was determined as picomoles of acetylated chloramphenicol per 100 mg of protein per hour .
Southern analysis of line 2 indicates numerous additional sequences present within the transgene concatemer ( data not shown ) .
Mor .
CELL .
BioL .
were much more restricted .
No detectable expression of either occurred in the fetal liver or in the upper airway epithelium of the developing lung .
Since occasional transgenic lines that contained the c-Myb site mutation retained some , or in one case considerable , total thymic CAT activity , we examined this effect using in situ hybridization .
Among independent transgenic lines that contained the mutant I 2.3 R7 transgene , there was no detectable expression in lines 3 , 4 , and 6 in any of the tissues examined , including thymus , liver , and spleen .
Not even occasional cells were expressing reporter gene .
This finding indicates that diminished expression was affecting all of the cells uniformly , rather than causing an alteration in the percentage of cells within the tissue that activate the locus .
However , we find it interesting that the higher-expressing lines 2 and 5 exhibited strong and uniform CAT mRNA signal over the cortical thymocytes , with appropriate lack of expression over the medullary thymocytes .
In the limited other tissues analyzed from these lines , no ectopic expression of CAT mRNA was ob-served .
This indicates that factor binding sites in addition to that of c-Myb are capable of specifying thymocyte-specific gene expression and that occasional integration sites are capable of overcoming the absence of a c-Myb binding site from the ADA LCR .
DISCUSSION Deletional analyses of regulatory sequences in the ADA gene first intron indicate a complex hierarchy of cis elements that combine to form a thymocyte-specific enhancer and LCR ( 2 , 3 ) .
Chromatin structure studies indicate that activation appears to be a stepwise process in which factor accessibility to regulatory sequences precedes the formation of DNase I hy-persensitivity .
The enhancer is able to generate initial accessi-bility , but the distal flanking facilitators participate in the formation of the DNase I-hypersensitive LCR that is essential for in vivo enhancer function .
We have now shown that c-Myb binds to and transactivates from a single element within the enhancer core .
c-Myb is present within T-lymphoblast cells that support the function of the enhancer and is also strongly expressed in cortical thymocytes in which the LCR is strongly active .
In the cortex of fetal thymus , there is coincident high-level expression of ec-myb and endogenous mouse ADA as well as ADA LCR-directed CAT gene expression .
Within the context of the intact LCR , mutation of the c-Myb site caused a severe loss of enhancer activity in both T-cell transfection assays and the majority of transgenic mice .
Taken together , these data demonstrate that within the highly organized ADA thymic regulatory region , there is a central role for a single c-Myb binding site .
Since c-Myb can perform a dominant functional role in the ADA LCR and is present at a very high level in the thymus , we hypothesize that c-Myb performs a similarly dominating role in the regulation of multiple genes necessary for T-cell Iymphogenesis .
c-Myb is a nonredundant determinant of early-stage hema-topoiesis , as shown by severe multilineage anemia in embryonic day 14 mice with a targeted deletion of the c-myb gene ( 26 ) .
Both immature myeloid and erythroid cell lines express c-Myb ( 17 , 24 ) , and their induced differentiation requires down-regulation of c-Myb expression .
In addition , c-mmyb antisense oligonucleotides can inhibit the progression of human chronic myeloid leukemic cells in a scid mouse ( 31 ) .
These results have suggested a critical role for c-Myb in the differentiation of erythroid and myeloid lineages , but a similar critical role for c-Myb in T cells has been more difficult to delin-cate .
Vou .
15 , 1995 c-Myb , AN LCR DETERMINANT FACTOR 5713 FIG .
7 .
In situ hybridization analysis for the detection of c-myb , endogenous ADA , and CAT mRNAs .
( a ) e-mmyb expression in an embryonic day 16.5 mouse .
The immature thymus ( thy ) shows very high expression in cortical thymocytes .
The liver ( Ii ) shows c-myb expression exclusively in hematopoietic cells .
Additional expression is seen in epithelial cells of developing lung ( Iu ) .
c-myb expression is also high in day 15 thymus ( not shown ) .
Final magnification , X 13 .
( b ) CAT expression in transgenic 4/12 ADA CAT fetal day 15 cells .
The thymus shows a strong signal , but there is no detectable expression in hematopoietic or lung cells ( not shown ) .
Final magnification , X 26 .
( c ) Endogenous ADA expression in transgenic 4/12 ADA CAT fetal day 15 cells .
The thymus again shows a strong signal , but there is no detectable expression in hematopoietic or lung cells ( not shown ) .
Final magnification , X26 .
( d ) CAT expression in transgenic 4/12 ADA CAT adult thymus .
Cortical thymocytes ( C ) are exclusively labeled ; medullary thymocytes ( M ) are negative .
Final magnification , X 26 .
( ¢ ) CAT expression is absent in adult thymus from transgenic I 2.3 R7 line 6 .
Final magnification , x65 .
( f ) CAT expression in adult thymus transgenic I 2.3 R7 line 2 is comparable to that of a normal LCR CAT transgene with an appropriate cortical-medullary expression pattern .
Final magnification , x26 .
5714 ESS ET AL .
A role for c-Myb in developing T cells was suspected from observations of its expression in thymocytes ( 32 , 35 ) , but the phenotype of the e-nyb knockout mouse was not revealing , presumably because hematopoietic failure precedes thymic development .
Distinguishing the role of c-Myb in hematopoietic multilineage progenitors from an additional role as a T-cell developmental factor requires cell-type-specific targeting .
Re-cently , Badiani et al .
( 4 ) produced transgenic mice with dom-inant-negative c-mmyb transgenes under the control of CD2 regulatory elements .
Thymocyte expression of dominant-neg-ative c-Myb derivatives caused thymocyte number reduction , apparently due to a failure to form double-positive thymocytes .
These results are suggestive of a role for c-Myb in T-cell ontogeny .
However , it remains possible that dominant-nega-tive c-Myb forms represent broadly acting effectors , able to distort gene expression and differentiation in lineages that are not necessarily dependent on the native protein .
In fact , the selective disruption of the thymic c-myb gene could be more destructive to T-cell development than expression of a domi-nant-negative form .
Other evidence that c-Myb regulates T-cell-specific gene expression includes the identification of c-Myb-responsive elements in the T-cell receptor 8 gene ( 18 ) , the CD4 gene ( 33 ) , and the c-myb gene itself ( 27 ) .
Interestingly , in the T-cell receptor 8 gene , mutation of a c-Myb binding site , or an adjacent core factor site , crippled the activity of a 370-bp enhancer in transfected T cells .
For the other thymocyte-expressed genes , the relative contribution of the c-Myb sites to their regulation is unclear , as the hierarchical organization of their promoters or enhancer ( s ) has not yet been defined .
Our data extend the suggestion that c-Myb is a powerful effector for some T-cell enhancers and additionally demonstrate that a single site for its binding can act as an organizer for LCR function .
There is a marked discrepancy between the activational potential of endogenously expressed c-Myb and that of cotransfected overexpressed c-Myb .
When polymerized core element reporter is transfected into Molt-4 T cells , there is a strict requirement for both ADA-NF1 and ADA-NF2 binding sites .
The introduction of exogenous c-Myb can not circumvent this requirement for both binding sites in Molt-4 cells ( 13a ) .
In contrast , only an intact ADA-NF1 site was required when c-Myb was added exogenously by cotransfection in Raji ( Fig .
2 ) , CEM ( 13a ) , and yeast ( Fig .
3 ) cells .
Given that Molt-4 and CEM T cells appear to express comparable amounts of c-Myb , variations of some additional factor ( s ) modulating endogenous c-Myb function is the likely explanation for why the polymerized core is a stronger element in Molt-4 than CEM cells .
An additional hypothesis is that there are distinct forms of c-Myb present in some T cells ( 33 ) , perhaps as a result of alternative mRNA splicing ( 37 ) .
However , if present , these forms could not be detected by Western analysis with the type I Upstate Biotechnology monoclonal antibody .
Deletional analyses of the ADA enhancer provide additional supportive evidence for the hypothesis that endogenously expressed c-Myb acts in partnership with other factors .
In transfected Molt-4 cells , strong enhancer activity required the enhancer core to be adjoined to elements present in sequences located up to 100 to 200 bp 5 ' or 3 ' of the core ( 3 ) .
The presence of both flanking regions conferred neither greater activation nor alteration in cell type specificity than was evident with only a single flanking segment .
In contrast , mutation of the single c-Myb site abolished enhancer activity with both flanking elements present .
Finally , ADA LCR expression occurred only in the context of the regulatory factors expressed in thymocytes , not in the other c-myb-expressing fetal hepatic hematopoietic or lung epithelial cells .
These results provide Mor .
CELL .
BioL .
additional support for the hypothesis that c-Myb-directed gene expression requires additional factors for target gene specificity in disparate cell types such as thymocytes , pre-erythroid or myeloid cells , or even lung epithelium .
Thus , the central role of c-Myb in the ADA LCR stands in contrast to its requirement for additional factors within different cellular compartments .
S. cerevisiae represents an evolutionarily divergent cell type within which c-Myb can be tested for its ability to overcome the structural constraints imposed by a chromatin environment .
In transgenic animals , the dependence of the intact ADA LCR on a large number of heterologous elements could mask the capability of c-Myb to act in chromatin .
Thus , in yeast cells , the function of the core element itself could be evaluated in a chromatin environment without the need for an extended complex regulatory region as required in transgenic mouse thymocytes .
Expression vectors encoding wild-type and truncated forms of c-Myb allowed us to evaluate domains implicated to modify the actions or interactions of c-Myb ( 8 ) .
An interesting difference was evident between the divergent ADA and mim-1A c-Myb binding sites in which only the C-terminal c-Myb truncation decreased transactivation of the ADA enhancer core .
That there is a difference between c-Myb domain requirements for activation of an ADA response element and the mim-1A myeloid response element provides an additional suggestion as to how c-Myb can act on distinct target sequences in combination with other factors found in different cellular contexts .
The N-terminal deletion effect on the ADA core element is consistent with a model of c-Myb DNA interaction in which the amino-terminal helix 1 serves only to modify the recognition of the target binding site ( 29 ) .
The potential for organized regulatory factor interactions that involve c-Myb is also suggested by its immunofluorescence observations in Molt-4 and CEM cells .
c-Myb was evident in large intranuclear speckled structures , broadly similar to those that have been observed for splicing and polyadenylation processes and factors ( 6 , 13 ) .
We hypothesize that these c-Myb-containing structures represent a direct visualization of T-cell transcriptional complexes .
The requirement of the ADA LCR ( 2 ) and other cell-specific LCRs ( 20 ) for extended cis-regula-tory regions may reflect what is required for assembly into large intranuclear structures such as those implied by the `` my-bosome . ``
Further studies are required to determine the identity of component subunits and if they contain factors that directly interact with c-Myb ( 12 , 14 ) .
One transgenic line , I 2.3 CAT R7-2 , exhibited essentially wild-type expression , suggesting a position-dependent escape mechanism .
The simplest explanation for the activity of this line is that its transgene has integrated into an active chromatin region that provides a compensatory effect for the lack of a c-Myb binding site .
Because all of the other sites are present , the architecture of a multifactor complex could be preserved .
This complex could even include c-Myb , perhaps by its interaction with multiple other factors through its C-terminal leucine zipper region ( 14 , 21 ) .
In some contexts , c-Myb has been shown to activate gene expression without the presence of a c-Myb binding site or even its DNA binding domain as long as other specific factor binding sites are present ( 15 , 22 ) .
Regardless of the mechanism by which the c-Myb site-mutated transgene can acquire function , most transgenic lines do not allow the thymocyte-specific transcriptional regulators to activate the enhancer region .
This observation indicates that the single c-Myb site plays a central role in the activation of the LCR .
We hypothesize that the localization of c-Myb in discrete subnuclear regions represents its concentration within transcription centers .
In the developing thymus , multiple enabling and restricting factors may interact with c-Myb to create a Vou .
15 , 1995 powerful deterministic complex that selectively activates the target genes required for T-cell lymphogenesis .
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Eric Westin , Agnes Cuddihy , Micheal Kuehl , Cathy Ley Ebert , Rui-Hong Chien , and Joe Lipsick for helpful discussions and enthusiasm , Shelley Barton and Steve Potter for reading the manu-script , A. Cuddihy and M. Kuehl for pRSVmyb , R. H. Chien for mim1la-LacZ and Myb yeast expression plasmids , E. Westin for pMbm-1 , Karen Yager for transgene microinjection , and Kathy Saal-feld for excellence in situ .
This research was supported by NIH research grants HD19919 ( J.H . )
and DK47022 ( B.A . )
, and a basic research grant from the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation .
K.E .
was supported by NIH training grant HLO7527 .
REFERENCES 1 .
Aronow , B. , D. Lattier , R. Silbiger , M. Dusing , J. Hutton , G. Jones , J .
Stock , J. McNeish , S. Potter , D. Witte , and D. Wiginton .
1989 .
Evidence for a complex regulatory array in the first intron of the human adenosine deaminase gene .
Genes Dev .
3:1384-400 .
2 .
Aronow , B. J. , C. A. Ebert , M. T. Valerius , S. S. Potter , D. A. Wiginton , D. P. Witte , and J. J. Hutton .
1995 .
Dissecting a locus control region : facilitation of enhancer function by extended enhancer-flanking sequences .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
15:1123-1135 .
3 .
Aronow , B. J. , R. N. Silbiger , M. R. Dusing , J. L. Stock , K. L. Yager , S. S. Potter , J. J. Hutton , and D. A. Wiginton .
1992 .
Functional analysis of the human adenosine deaminase gene thymic regulatory region and its ability to generate position-independent transgene expression .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
12 : 4170-4185 .
4 .
Badiani , P. , P. Corbella , D. Kioussis , J. Marvel , and K. Weston .
1994 .
Dominant interfering alleles define a role for c-Myb in T-cell development .
Genes Dev .
8:770-782 .
5 .
Bhaumik , D. , B. Yang , T. Trangas , J. S. Bartlett , M. S. Coleman , and D. H. Sorscher .
1994 .
Identification of a tripartite basal promoter which regulates human terminal deoxynucleotidy ] transferase gene expression .
J. Biol .
Chem .
269:15861-15867 .
6 .
Blencowe , B. J. , J .
A. Nickerson , R. Issner , S. Penman , and P. A .
Sharp .
1994 .
Association of nuclear matrix antigens with exon-containing splicing complexes .
J .
Cell Biol .
127:593-607 .
7 .
Caterina , J. J. , D. J. Ciavatta , D. Donze , R. R. Behringer , and T. M. Townes .
1994 .
Multiple elements in human beta-globin locus control region 5 ' HS 2 are involved in enhancer activity and position-independent , transgene expression .
Nucleic Acids Res .
22:1006-1111 .
8 .
Chen , R. H. , and J. S. Lipsick .
1993 .
Differential transcriptional activation by v-myb and c-myb in animal cells and Saccharomyces cerevisiae .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
13:4423-31 .
9 .
Chomezynski , P. 1993 .
A reagent for the single-step simultaneous isolation of RNA , DNA and proteins from cell and tissue samples .
BioTechniques 15:532-534 , 536-537 .
10 .
Cuddihy , A. E. , L. A. Brents , N. Aziz , T. P. Bender , and W. M. Kueh ] .
1993 .
Only the DNA binding and transactivation domains of c-Myb are required to block terminal differentiation of murine erythroleukemia cells .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
13:3505-3513 .
11 .
Dillon , N. , and F. Grosveld .
1994 .
Chromatin domains as potential units of eukaryotic gene function .
Curr .
Opin .
Genet .
Dev .
4260-264 .
12 .
Dubendorff , J. W. , L. J. Whittaker , J. T. Eltman , and J. S. Lipsick .
1992 .
Carboxy-terminal elements of c-Myb negatively regulate transcriptional activation in cis and in trans .
Genes Dev .
62524-2535 .
13 .
Durfee , T. , M. A. Mancini , D. Jones , S. J. Elledge , and W. H. Lee .
1994 .
The amino-terminal region of the retinoblastoma gene product binds a novel nuclear matrix protein that co-localizes to centers for RNA processing .
J .
Cell Biol .
127:609-22 .
13a.Ess , K. , and B. Aronow .
Unpublished data .
14 .
Favier , D. , and T. J. Gonda .
1994 .
Detection of proteins that bind to the leucine zipper motif of c-Myb .
Oncogene 9:305-311. c-Myb , AN LCR DETERMINANT FACTOR 5715 15 .
Foos , G. , S. Natour , and K. H. Klempnauer .
1993 .
TATA-box dependent trans-activation of the human HSP70 promoter by Myb proteins .
Oncogene 8:1775-1782 .
16 .
Forrester , W. C. , U. Novak , R. Gelinas , and M. Groudine .
1989 .
Molecular analysis of the human beta-globin locus activation region .
Proc .
Nat .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 86:5439-5443 .
17 .
Gonda , T. J. , and D. Metcalf .
1984 .
Expression of myb , myc and fos proto-oncogenes during the differentiation of a murine myeloid leukaemia .
Nature ( London ) 310:249-251 .
17a.Haynes , T. , and D. Wiginton .
Personal communication .
18 .
Hernandez , M. C. , and M. S. Krangel .
1994 .
Regulation of the T-cell receptor delta enhancer by functional cooperation between c-Myb and core-binding factors .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
14:473-483 .
19 .
Howe , K. M. , and R. J. Watson .
1991 .
Nucleotide preferences in sequence-specific recognition of DNA by c-myb protein .
Nucleic Acids Res .
19:3913-3919 .
20 .
Jenuwein , T. , W. C. Forrester , R. G. Qiu , and R. GrosschedI .
1993 .
The immunoglobulin mu enhancer core establishes local factor access in nuclear chromatin independent of transcriptional stimulation .
Genes Dev .
7:2016-2032 .
21 .
Kanei , I. C. , E. M. MacMillan , T. Nomura , A. Sarai , R. G. Ramsay , S. Aimoto , S. Ishii , and T. J. Gonda .
1992 .
Transactivation and transformation by Myb are negatively regulated by a leucine-zipper structure .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 89:3088-3092 .
22 .
Kanei , I C. , T. Yasukawa , R. I. Morimoto , and S. Ishii .
1994. c-Myb-induced trans-activation mediated by heat shock elements without sequence-specific DNA binding of c-Myb .
J. Biol .
Chem .
269:15768-15775 .
23 .
Liischer , B. , and R. N. Eisenman .
1988. c-myc and c-myb protein degrada-tion : effect of metabolic inhibitors and heat shock .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
8:2504-2512 .
24 .
McClinton , D. , J. Stafford , L. Brents , T. P. Bender , and W. M. Kuehl .
1990 .
Differentiation of mouse erythroleukemia cells is blocked by late up-regu-lation of a c-myb transgene .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
10:705-710 .
25 .
Miller , S. J .
1972 .
Experiments in molecular genetics .
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , Cold Spring Harbor , N.Y. 26 .
Mucenski , M. L. , K. McLain , A .
B. Kier , S. H. Swerdlow , C. M. Schreiner , T. A. Miller , D. W. Pictryga , W. J. Scott , and S. S. Potter .
1991 .
A functional c-myb gene is required for normal murine fetal hepatic hematopoiesis .
Cell 65:677-689 .
27 .
Nicolaides , N. C. , R. Gualdi , C. Casadevall , L. Manzella , and B. Calabretta .
1991 .
Positive autoregulation of c-myb expression via Myb binding sites in the 5 ' flanking region of the human c-myb gene .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
11:6166-6176 .
28 .
Nossal , G. J .
1994 .
Negative selection of lymphocytes .
Cell 76:229-239 .
29 .
Ogata , K. , S. Morikawa , H. Nakamura , A. Sekikawa , T. Inoue , H. Kanai , A. Sarai , S. Ishii , and Y. Nishimura .
1994 .
Solution structure of a specific DNA complex of the Myb DNA-binding domain with cooperative recognition helices .
Cell 79:639-648 .
30 .
Peterson , K. R. , and G. Stamatoyannopoulos .
1993 .
Role of gene order in developmental control of human gamma- and beta-globin gene expression .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
13:4836-4843 .
31 .
Ratajezak , M. Z. , J .
A. Kant , S. M. Luger , N. Hijiya , J. Zhang , G. Zon , and A. M. Gewirtz .
1992 .
In vivo treatment of human leukemia in a scid mouse model with c-myb antisense oligodeoxynucleotides .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 89:11823-11827 .
32 .
Sheiness , D. , and M. Gardinier .
1984 .
Expression of a proto-oncogene ( proto-myb ) in hemopoietic tissues of mice .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
4:1206-1212 .
33 .
Siu , G. , A. L. Wurster , J. S. Lipsick , and S. M. Hedrick .
1992 .
Expression of the CD4 gene requires a Myb transcription factor .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
12:1592-1604 .
34 .
Surh , C. D. , and J. Sprent .
1994 .
T-cell apoptosis detected in situ during positive and negative selection in the thymus .
Nature ( London ) 372:100-103 .
35 .
Thompson , C. B. , P. B. Challoner , P. E. Neiman , and M. Groudine .
1986 .
Expression of the e-myb proto-oncogene during cellular proliferation .
Nature ( London ) 319:374-380 .
36 .
West , R. W. , Jr. , R. R. Yocum , and M. Ptashne .
1984 .
Saccharomyces cerevi-sine GALI-GAL1IO divergent promoter region : location and function of the upstream activating sequence UASG .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
42467-2478 .
37 .
Westin , E. H. , K. M. Gorse , and M. F. Clarke .
1990 .
Alternative splicing of the human c-myb gene .
Oncogene 5:1117-1124 .
