216 J Med Genet 1996 ; 33:216-220 Brief papers Wessex Regional Genetic Service , Level G , Princess Anne Hospital , Coxford Road , Southampton SO16 SYA , UK E Hatchwell Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory , Salisbury District Hospital , Salisbury , Wiltshire SP2 8BJ , UK D Robinson J A Crolla A E Cockwell Correspondence to : Dr Hatchwell .
Received 18 August 1995 .
Accepted for publication 11 October 1995 X inactivation analysis in a female with hypomelanosis of Ito associated with a balanced X ; 17 translocation : evidence for functional disomy of Xp Eli Hatchwell , David Robinson , John A Crolla , Annette E Cockwell Abstract X inactivation analysis was performed on normal and hypopigmented skin samples obtained from a female with hypomelanosis of Ito associated with a balanced whole arm X ; 17 translocation .
Severe skewing of X inactivation resulting in inactivity of the intact X was found in blood and cultures of both types of skin , but analysis of DNA prepared directly from hypopigmented skin showed significant inactivation of the translocated X , inconsistent with the usual mechanism of phenotypic expression in XK ; autosome translocations .
In addition , dual colour FISH analysis using centromere specific probes for chromosomes X and 17 showed that the breakpoints on both chromosomes lie within the alphoid arrays , making interruption of a locus on either chromosome unlikely .
While partial variable monosomy of loci on chromosome 17p can not be excluded as contributing to the phenotype in this patient , it is argued that the major likely factor is partial functional disomy of sequences on Xp in cell lineages that have failed to inactivate the intact X chromosome .
( J Med Genet 1996 ; 33:216-220 ) Key words : hypomelanosis of Ito ; X ; autosome trans-location ; incontinentia pigmenti ; functional disomy Xp .
Hypomelanosis of Ito ( HI ) is a disorder of heterogeneous aetiology .
It is characterised by streaks or whorls , or both , of hypopigmentation often associated with CNS abnormalities . ``
Recent evidence suggests that the common feature in many patients with HI is the presence of two or more genetically distinct cell lines . ``
The description of a number of females with balanced X ; autosome translocations and a cy-togenic breakpoint in Xpl1 , described variously as having HI or incontinentia pigmenti ( IP ) , prompted the suggestion that the locus for IP was at Xpl1 .
* `` Linkage analysis in familial IP , however , excluded this region and significant evidence now exists for the presence of a locus at Xq28 . ``
'' `` `` In addition , it is now clear that the phenotype described in females with HI associated with X ; autosome translocations is not consistent with familial IP .
Confusion between the two conditions results partly from the alternative name for HI ( in-continentia pigmenti achromians ) and the similarity of the skin lesions in the two conditions . ``
'' However , significant differences between the two conditions are evident , including fixed skin abnormalities in HI compared with evolving abnormalities in IP and the absence of dysmorphic features in IP , unlike HIL . ``
In order to examine the hypothesis that it is the functional status of the translocated X , rather than the site of the X breakpoint , that is significant in producing the phenotype of HI , X inactivation analysis was performed on skin derived from affected ( hypopigmented ) and unaffected skin in a female with HI associated with a balanced , constitutional whole arm X ; 17 translocation .
Case report This female has previously been reported . ``
`` Severe psychomotor delay was noted with a developmental level of 8-11 months at the age of 2 years 5 months .
She stood alone at this age , but never walked .
Dysmorphic features noted then included hypertelorism , a broad , flat nasal bridge , and epicanthic folds .
At the age of 21 , she remains globally severely delayed .
She is unable to sit unaided and has no com-munication .
She is dysmorphic with hypertelorism and macrocephaly ( 95th centile ) ( fig 1 ) .
Her hands are small .
Examination of the skin shows whorls and streaks of hypopigmented skin , particularly on the back and lower limbs ( fig 2 ) .
Materials and methods X inactivation analysis by PCR was carried out on DNA extracted from blood lymphocytes , hypopigmented and normal skin , and cell cultures of hypopigmented and normal skin .
An X inactivation analysis in a female with hypomelanosis of Ito associated with a balanced X ; 17 translocation 217 Figure 1 - Female with HI in association with a balanced whole arm X ; 17 translocation aged 21 .
There is marked hypertelorism and a broad , prominent forehead .
Figure 2 Skin of female with HI associated with a balanced X ; 17 translocation showing marked hypomelanosis that is present in whorls and streaks .
1H 1 2H 2 3H 3 4H 4 Figure 3 X inactivation analysis on DNA isolated from cultured and uncultured skin samples from a female with HI associated with a balanced X ; 17 translocation .
Severe skewing towards activity of the derived X is noted in all samples , except for the direct analysis of hypopigmented skin .
Track 1 : peripheral blood leucocytes .
Track 2 : DNA from normal skin ( direct analysis ) .
Track 3 : DNA from hypopigmented skin ( direct analysis ) .
Track 4 : DNA from normal skin ( cultured fibroblasts ) .
Track 5 : DNA from hypopigmented skin ( cultured fibroblasts ) .
Track 6 : peripheral blood leucocytes from patient 's mother .
H denotes predigestion with Hpall .
Table 1 X inactivation analysis by PCR of skin biopsies from a female with HI in association with a balanced , constitutional X ; 17 translocation .
The intensities of the bands representing the derived and intact X chromosomes are expressed as a percentage of the combined intensities of both bands Hypopigmented skin Direct Derived X 59-2 Intact X 40-8 Cultured Derived X 98-2 Intact X 1-8 Hpall site which is methylated exclusively on inactive X chromosomes and which is close to a polymorphic site within the human androgen receptor gene ( HUMAR ) was analysed using the method described by Allen et al . '
'' The PCR primers were as described previously `` : primer 1 , 55GCTGTGAAGGTTGCTGTTC-CTCAT3 ' , primer 2 , STCCAGAATCTG-TTCCAGAGCGTGC3 .
DNA ( 1 ug ) was predigested for 16 hours at 37°C with Hpall in a volume of 20 ul containing 10 mmol/l Tris HCI , pH 7-5 , 10 mmol/l MgCl , , 1 mmol/l dithiothreitol ( BCL buffer L ) , and 10 units of Hpall .
Controls for each DNA sample were treated in exactly the same way except that no restriction enzyme was added .
Two microlitres of the Hpall digest were amplified by PCR using the HUMAR primers described above .
Primer 2 was end labelled using T4 polynucleotide kinase and gamma P ATP `` The reaction contained 10 mmol/l Tris HCl , pH8-3 , 50 mmol/l KCI , 2 mmol/l MgC ) , 230 umol/l each dNTP , 0:8 umol/l each primer , and 0-5 units of Taq polymerase in a volume of 50 ul .
An initial denaturation step of 96°C for seven minutes was followed by 28 cycles of 95°C for one minute , 60°C for one minute , and 72°C for two minutes with a final extension step of 72°C for seven minutes .
PCR products ( 5 ul ) were added to an equal volume of gel electrophoresis buffer ( 95 % formamide , 20 mmol/l EDTA , 0:05 % bromo-phenol blue , 0:05 % xylene cyanol ) , heated at 100°C for five minutes , and loaded onto a denaturing 6 % 39:1 acrylamide/bisacrylamide sequencing gel containing 6 mol/l urea in Tris borate buffer .
Bands were visualised and band intensities measured using a Fuji phospho-imager .
Fluorescence in situ hybridisation ( FISH ) was performed using a standard protocol `` with biotin labelled X centromere probe ( DXZ2 ) and digoxigenin labelled 17 centromere alphoid repeat ( D17Z1 ) .
Following stringent washing , the sites of hybridisation were visualised using dual colour fluorescence reporter molecules ( Texas Red for biotin and FITC for digoxigenin labelled probes , respectively ) .
The signals were captured using a cooled CCD camera and enhanced with Smartcapture software ( Digital Scientific , Cambridge ) .
For late labelling studies , fibroblasts derived from both skin biopsies were cultured with the addition of BrdU for the last eight hours before harvest . ``
The metaphases obtained were stained with acridine orange ( 10 ug/ml ) and viewed under epifluorescence .
Results The results of X inactivation analysis by PCR are shown in fig 3 and table 1 .
DNA extracted from blood and from cultured normal and hypopigmented skin showed a severe skewing of X inactivation indicating that the translocated X was active in almost 100 % of cells , as expected .
However , analysis of DNA from uncultured hypopigmented skin showed a more 218 Table 2 - BrdU results in normal and hypopigmented skin from a female with HI and a balanced X ; 17 translocation .
The late labelling chromosome was the intact X in all cells examined in both samples Normal skin Hypopigmented skin Late labelling Derived X 0/33 cells examined 0/29 cells examined Intact X 33/33 cells examined 29/29 cells examined Figure 4 - Results of dual colour FISH following hybridisation with DXZ2 labelled with digoxigenin and detected with FITC ( green ) and D17Z1 labelled with biotin and detected with Texas Red .
Both derivative chromosomes show a mixture of red , green , and yellow signal showing that the breakpoints have occurred within the alphoid arrays of both centromeres .
balanced pattern of X inactivation , indicating that the intact X was active in approximately 40 % of cells .
BrdU analysis of cells cultured from blood , hypopigmented skin , and normal skin showed in all cases the normal X to be almost exclusively inactive ( table 2 ) .
Dual colour FISH showed that both translocation products had compound centromeres , that is , were composed of both red ( X centromere ) and green ( 17 centromere ) signals , indicating that the breakpoint in both translocation chromosomes had occurred within the alphoid arrays ( fig 4 ) .
Fig 3 also showed the active translocated X to be paternal in origin .
This is consistent with the 12 other cases of balanced de novo X ; autosome translocations which have been stud-ied , all of which are paternal in origin . ``
Discussion The discovery of balanced X ; autosome translocations in females manifesting characteristic X linked phenotypes normally seen only in males has been of enormous benefit in the Hatchwell , Robinson , Crolla , Cockwell P XIC XIC q q X 17 Der ( 17 ) Der ( X ) Inactive active active p XIC q X 17 Der ( 17 ) Der ( X ) Active active inactive Figure 5 ( Top ) - The majority of cells in the female with the balanced X ; 17 translocation will be genetically balanced , as depicted .
The intact X is inactive , while the derived X is active resulting in one active copy of Xp and one of Xq ( with the exception of loci on the inactive X that always fail to inactivate ) .
In addition , there are two active copies of 17p and 179 .
( Bottom ) This figure illustrates the situation in those cells that have failed to inactivate in the usual way .
The intact X is active , while the derived X is inactive .
Two functionally active copies of Xp ( that is , of all sequences distal to the breakpoint at Xcen ) are therefore present : one on the intact X and one on the derived 17 .
The latter Xp is presumed to remain functional as it has been physically disconnected from the XIC of the derived X .
In addition to functional disomy of Xp , it is likely that there will be a ( variable ) monosomy of 17p sequences owing to spreading of inactivation from the XIC of the inactive derived X. XIC=X inactivation centre .
localisation and eventual isolation of the genes responsible for a number of disorders , including Duchenne muscular dystrophy , Menkes dis-ease , and Lowe 's syndrome .
`` * `` `` In females possessing such balanced X ; autosome trans-locations , it is usually found that the translocated X is active in the great majority of , if not all , cells ( although analysis is usually only performed on peripheral blood leucocytes ) .
While X inactivation is thought to occur randomly initially , cells that have inactivated the translocated X may be at a selective dis-advantage , either because of spreading of X inactivation into the translocated autosome or , more likely , because of the functional disomy of sequences on the X distal to the site of the X breakpoint . ``
An abnormal phenotype results because X inactivation is severely skewed , so that the intact X is always inactive ( and thus so is the relevant locus ) while the active ( trans- X inactivation analysis in a female with hypomelanosis of Ito associated with a balanced X ; 17 translocation located ) X has a non-functional locus owing to direct interruption .
In the case of the X ; 17 translocation described here , two findings make it unlikely that the classical mechanism is relevant .
( 1 ) Dual colour FISH analysis shows the breakpoints to be centromeric on each chromosome , making direct interruption of a gene highly unlikely .
( 2 ) While the pattern of X inactivation is as expected in most samples , it differs significantly in affected , uncultured skin .
It is likely that cells that have an inactive derived X are selected against during culture and thus their presence can only be deduced by direct analysis of affected skin which has not been cultured ( that such selection takes place at all may be an indication of how abnormal such `` near lethal `` cells are ) .
It is noteworthy that X inactivation analysis of uncultured tissue would not have been possible before the advent of molecular techniques , such as used in this study .
Thus , it is likely that the unusual pattern of X inactivation found in hypopigmented skin from our patient would not have been detected in the past because of the reliance of techniques on cell culture .
It is clear , however , that despite eradication of these cells in culture , they are tolerated in vivo , although the reasons for this are unclear .
There are likely to be two consequences of the presence of cells harbouring an inactive derived X chromosome in the affected tissue , namely partial functional disomy of Xp and partial ( variable ) functional monosomy of 17p ( fig 5 , bottom ) .
Much evidence now exists that the presence of functional disomy of sequences on the X , albeit in only a proportion of cells , can confer a severe phenotype in some females .
Females with ring X chromosomes are likely to have a severe phenotype if the ring X is unable to inactivate . ``
Some of the females have been found to possess a pigmentary dysplasia reminiscent of HI , in addition to CNS abnormalities and dysmorphic features . ``
'' The evidence provided here points to a correlation between the X inactivation status of the translocated X , and the presence of hypopigmented skin in a female with HI associated with a balanced , whole arm constitutional X ; 17 translocation .
Cells that have inactivated the derived X are likely to have functional disomy of sequences of the X , distal to the breakpoint at Xcen , and variable functional monosomy of sequences distal to the centromeric breakpoint on chromosome 17 .
While it may be argued that the autosomal monosomy may be contributing to the phenotype , it is unlikely to be the main factor as the autosomes involved in other females described with HI in association with a balanced X ; autosome translocation are usually different . ``
'' `` '* The presence of functional disomy of Xp in even a small proportion of cells is likely to give rise to a severe phenotype , particularly if the CNS is involved .
HI in this female may simply be the manifestation of the presence of a `` near lethal `` cell line in the skin .
Such `` near lethality `` may result from a number of chromosomal ( functional ) aneuploidies , of which disomy of Xp is only one example .
219 We are grateful to Annette Cockwell , Andrew Fisher , and Carolyn Campbell for their help with the analysis of the translocation and the pattern of X inactivation as deduced from BrdU incorporation .
We are also grateful to Dr Peter Turnpenny for his help .
1 Ito M. Incontinentia pigmenti achromians .
A singular case of nevus depigmentosus systematicus bilateralis .
Tohoku J Exp Med ( Sendai ) 1952 ; 55 ( suppl ) :57-9 .
Donnai D , Read AP , McKeown C , Andrews T. Hypomelanosis of Ito : a manifestation of mosaicism or chimerism .
J Med Genet 1988 ; 25:809-18 .
Thomas IT , Frias JL , Cantu ES , Lafer CZ , Flannery DB , Graham JJ .
Association of pigmentary anomalies with chromosomal and genetic mosaicism and chimerism .
A » J Hum Genet 1989 ; 45:193-205 .
Sybert VP , Pagon RA , Donlan M , Bradley CM .
Pigmentary abnormalities and mosaicism for chromosomal aberration : association with clinical features similar to hypomelanosis of Ito .
J Pediatr 1990 ; 116:581-6 .
Bitoun P , Philippe C , Cherif M , Mulcahy MT , Gilgenkrantz S. Incontinentia pigmenti ( type 1 ) and X ; 5 translocation .
Ann Genet ( Paris ) 1992 ; 35:51-4 .
Koiffmann CP , De SD , Diament A , er al .
Incontinentia pigmenti achromians ( hypomelanosis of Ito , MIM 146150 ) ; further evidence of localization at Xp11 .
Am J Med Genet 1993 ; 46:529-33 .
Cannizzaro LA , Hecht F. Gene for incontinentia pigmenti maps to band Xpl1 with an ( X ; 10 ) ( pl1 ; q22 ) translocation .
Clin Genet 1987 ; 32:66-9 .
Kajii T , Tsukahara M , Fukushima Y , Hata A , Matsuo K , Kuroki Y. Translocation ( X ; 13 ) ( p11.21 ; q12.3 ) in a girl with incontinentia pigmenti and bilateral retinoblastoma .
Ann Genet ( Paris ) 1985 ; 28:219-23 .
Gilgenkrantz S , Tridon P , Pinel BN , Beurey J , Weber M. Translocation ( X ; 9 ) ( p11 ; q434 ) in a girl with incontinentia pigmenti ( IP ) : implications for the regional assignment of the IP locus to Xp11 ?
Ann Genet ( Paris ) 1985 ; 28:90-2 .
10 Hodgson SV , Neville B , Jones RW , Fear C , Bobrow M. Two cases of X/autosome translocation in females with incontinentia pigmenti .
Hum Gener 1985 ; 71:231-4 .
Lungarotti MS , Martello C , Calabro A , Baldari F , Mariotti G. Hypomelanosis of Ito associated with chromosomal translocation involving Xp11 .
Am J Med Gene : 1991 ; 40 : 447-8 .
12 Sefiani A , Abel L , Heuertz S , et al .
The gene for incontinentia pigmenti is assigned to Xq28 .
Genomics 1989 ; 4:427-9 .
13 Harris A , Lankester S , Haan E , er al .
The gene for incontinentia pigmenti : failure of linkage studies using DNA probes to confirm cytogenetic localization .
Clin Genet 1988 ; 34:1-6 .
14 Sefiani A , Sinnett D , Abel L , et al .
Linkage studies do not confirm the cytogenetic location of incontinentia pigmenti on Xp11 .
Hum Genet 1988 ; 80:282-6 .
Smahi A , Hyden GC , Peterlin B , er al .
The gene for the familial form of incontinentia pigmenti ( IP2 ) maps to the distal part of Xq28 .
Hum Molec Genet 1994 ; 3:273-8 .
16 Sybert VP , Incontinentia pigmenti nomenclature .
Am J Hun Genet 1994 ; 55:209-11 .
Crolla JA , Gilgenkrantz S , De GJ , Kajii T , Bobrow M. Incontinentia pigmenti and X-autosome translocations .
Non-isotopic in situ hybridization with an X-centromere-specific probe ( pSV2X5 ) reveals a possible X-centromeric breakpoint in one of five published cases .
Hum Genet 1989 ; 81:269-72 .
18 Allen RC , Zoghbi HY , Moseley AB , Rosenblatt HM , Belmont JW .
Methylation of Hpall and Hhal sites near the polymorphic CAG repeat in the human androgen-receptor gene correlates with X chromosome inactivation .
Am J Hum Genet 1992 ; 51:1229-39 .
19 Tilley WD , Marcelli M , Wilson JD , McPhaul MJ .
Characterization and expression of a cDNA encoding the human androgen receptor .
Proc Nat !
Acad Sci USA 1989 ; 86:327-31 .
20 Maniatis T , Fritsch EF , Sambrook J. Molecular cloning : a laboratory manual .
New York : Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , 1982 .
Pinkel D , Landegent J , Collins C , er al .
Fluorescence in situ hybridization with human chromosome-specific libraries : detection of trisomy 21 and translocations of chromosome 4 .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1988 ; 85:9138-42 .
22 Dutrillaux B , Viegas PE .
High resolution R- and G-banding on the same preparation .
Hum Genet 1981 ; 57:93-5 .
Robinson DO , Boyd Y , Cockburn D , Collinson MN , Craig I , Jacobs PA .
The parental origin of de novo X-autosome translocations in females with Duchenne muscular dystrophy revealed by M27 beta methylation analysis .
Gener Res 1990 ; 56:1 35-40 .
24 Hodgson SV , Heckmatt JZ , Hughes E , Crolla JA , Dubowitz V , Bobrow M. A balanced de novo X/autosome translocation in a girl with manifestations of Lowe syndrome .
Am J Med Genet 1986 ; 23:837-47 .
25 Lindenbaum RH , Clarke G , Patel C , Moncrieff M , Hughes JT .
Muscular dystrophy in an X ; 1 translocation female suggests that Duchenne locus is on X chromosome short arm .
J Med Genet 1979 ; 16:389-92 .
26 Kapur S , Higgins JV , Delp K , Rogers B. Menkes syndrome in a girl with X-autosome translocation .
Am J Med Gener 1987 ; 26:503-10 .
27 Schmidt M , Du Sart D. Functional disomies of the X chromosome influence the cell selection and hence the X inactivation pattern in females with balanced X-autosome translocations : a review of 122 cases .
Am J Med Gener 1992 ; 42:161-9. to d im Ui & ~ co w 1 w 1 wi 1 ~ 2 fast 2 we 220 28 Migeon BR , Luo S , Stasiowski BA , et al .
Deficient transcription of XIST from tiny ring X chromosomes in females with severe phenotypes .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993 ; 90:1 2025-9 .
29 Dennis NR , Collins AL , Crolla JA , Cockwell AE , Fisher AM , Jacobs PA. Three patients with ring ( X ) chromosomes and a severe phenotype .
J Med Genet 1993 ; 30:482-6 .
30 De Grouchy J , Turleau C , Doussau DBM , Maroteaux P , Thibaud D. Incontinentia pigmenti ( IP ) and r ( X ) .
Hatchwell , Robinson , Crolla , Cockwell Tentative mapping of the IP locus to the X juxta-centromeric region .
Ann Gener ( Paris ) 1985 ; 28:86-9 .
31 Penchaszadeh VB , Babu A , Schwartz M , David KL , Popescu S , Rubinstein C. Hypomelanosis of Ito in a girl with a de novo translocation ( X ; 14 ) ( q11 ; q13 ) .
Am J Hum Genet 1989 ; 45 ( suppl ) : A219 .
32 Steichen GE , Trawoger R , Duba HC , Mayr U , Felber S , Utermann G. Hypomelanosis of Ito in a girl with plexus papilloma and translocation ( X ; 17 ) .
Hum Gener 1993 ; 90 : 611-3 .
