From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
E3 , a Hematopoietic-Specific Transcript Directly Regulated by the Retinoic Acid Receptor a By Linda M. Scott , LeMoyne Mueller , and Steven J. Collins Retinoic acid ( RA ) -induced maturation mediated by the retinoic acid receptor a ( RARa ) has been implicated in myeloid development .
We have used differential hybridization analysis of a cDNA library constructed from the murine RA-inducible MPRO promyelocyte cell lins to identify immediate-early genes induced by RA during granulocytic differentiation .
E3 , one of nine sequences identified , was upregulated in an immediate-early manner , with transcript levels peaking after 60 minutes exposure to RA .
E3 transcripts were RA-inducible in HL60 cells , but not in an RA-resistant subclone , HLGOR , that harbors a mutated AMARe gene .
However , when HLG6OR cells were transduced with a functional copy of the ETINOIC ACID ( RA ) , the active metabolite of vitamin A , appears to contribute to a wide range of biologic processes involved with epithelial differentiation , cellular homeostasis , embryogenesis , and tumor suppression .
The diverse range of responses to RA appears to be mediated primarily by two classes of ligand-dependent transcription factors that belong to the steroid/thyroid superfamily of hormone receptors .
These are the RA receptor ( RAR ) and retinoid-X receptor ( RXR ) families , `` of which there are at least three different members , a , 3 , and y , usually present in several isoforms .
Although the RAR and RXR molecules specifically respond to RA , they differ from one another in primary structure and ligand specificity .
RXRs bind the 9-cis RA isomer with high affinity , whereas RARs bind both the 9-cis and the all-trans isoforms . ``
This complex array of receptor molecules forms dimers capable of altering transcription of target genes in a positive or a negative manner , dependent on the cellular context .
RARs activate transcription of target genes by direct interaction with specific DNA sequences known as RA response elements .
Several target genes regulated directly via these response elements have been identified and include genes involved in RA-mediated signaling , such as RARa and RAR,3 , *~ cellular retinol binding protein I and cellular retinoic acid binding protein II , ** homeobox genes Hoxal and Hoxb1 , * `` and the immediate-early gene , zif268 . ``
Promoter analysis of multiple target genes has shown RA response elements to be direct repeats of a hexameric consensus motif , AGGTCA , although the sequence , spacing , and number of these half-sites is variable and may contribute to the binding affinity and dimer specificity of the enhancer elements .
'* `` Several lines of evidence suggest RA and its receptor , RARa , may be involved in hematopoietic regulation .
RA has been shown to induce terminal granulocytic differentiation of the human myeloid HL6O0 cell-line . '
'' Evidence that RARa mediates this response was obtained when an RA-resistant subclone , HL6OR , was observed to harbor RA receptors with significantly reduced affinity for RA . ``
These receptors are produced as the result of a point mutation within one copy of the RARa gene , leading to the synthesis of truncated RARa molecules with aberrant ligand-binding domains . ``
Retroviral-mediated transfer of a functional RARa gene into these HLGOR cells restored their sensitivity to RA , facilitat- Blood , Vol 88 , No 7 ( October 1 ) , 1996 : pp 2517-2530 gene , RA induced a 10-fold increase in E3 mRNA levels .
E3 transcripts are present in the myeloid , B-lymphoid , and erythroid lineages , absent in nonhematopoietic cells , and encode a highly hydrophobic , potentially phosphorylated polypeptide of unknown function with significant homology to a putative protein expressed in myeloid cells .
The murine E3 promoter harbors a single bipartite retinoic acid response element which in transient transfection assays conferred RA sensitivity .
These results indicate that E3 is a hematopoietic-specific gene that is an immediate target for the activated RARa during myslopoiesis .
© 1996 by The American Society of Hematology .
ing granulocytic differentiation .
Introduction into multipotent FDCP mixA4 cells of a similarly mutated RARe , RARa403 , significantly alters their differentiation character-istics , implying that the role of RARa during hematopoiesis may be to promote granulocytic differentiation . ``
Similarly , the expression of RARa403 in mouse bone marrow ( BM ) cells has led to the establishment of a granulocyte/macro-phage colony-stimulating factor ( GM-CSF ) -dependent promyelocytic cell-line , MPRO , *° the cells of which closely resemble the leukemic myeloblasts present in human acute promyelocytic leukemia .
Acute promyelocytic leukemia ( APL ) is a subtype of myeloid leukemia that is distinguished in part by the accumulation of proliferating promyelocytes .
As RA exerts a strong effect on APL BM cultures by inducing progressive differentiation of blasts into mature granulocytes , `` and as patients rapidly achieve remission by the oral administration of su-praphysiological concentrations of RA , `` it has been suggested that perturbations in RA-mediated granulocytic differentiation may play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of this disorder .
An additional association between APL and RA is apparent at the molecular level .
Characterization of the chromosomal breakpoints present in the translocations , t ( 15 ; 17 ) ( q22 ; q12-21 ) , which is detectable in the vast majority of APL cases , and t ( 11 ; 17 ) ( q23 ; q21 ) , an infrequent APL translocation , localized the breakpoint on chromosome 17 to within the RARa gene .
`` * `` Both translocations result in expression of RARa chimeric proteins , either PML/RARa or PLZF/RARa , respectively , which retain the majority of From the Division of Molecular Medicine , Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center , Seattle WA .
Submitted November 22 , 1995 ; accepted May 21 , 1996 .
Supported by National Institutes of Health Grant No .
CAS8292 to SJ.C .
Address reprint requests to Steven J. Collins , MD , Division of Molecular Medicine , Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center , 1124 Columbia St , €2-023 , Seattle , WA 98104 .
The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge payment .
This article must therefore be hereby marked `` `` advertisement `` in accordance with 18 U.S.C .
section 1734 solely to indicate this fact .
© 1996 by The American Society of Hematology .
0006-4971/96/8807-0036 $ 3.00/0 2517 From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
2518 the functional domains present within the parental proteins , including the RARa ligand-binding and DNA-binding do-mains . ``
'' `` ' Although the PLZF and PML sequences are not related to one another , they each contain zinc fingers and proline-rich sequences that have been implicated in transcriptional regulation `` and that are retained in the chimeric RARa proteins .
The observation that RARa is the common target in translocations associated with APL strongly implicates expression of an abnormal RARa fusion product in the etiology of this disease .
However , the cellular implications of the presence of mutated RARa proteins on promyelocytic differentiation have yet to be explored .
One of the barriers to identifying the role of RA and its receptors in the development of neutrophils has been the identification of sequences whose transcription during normal myelopoiesis is directly modulated by RARa .
To approach this problem we have used the murine promyelocytic MPRO cell-line , the cells of which can be rapidly induced to terminally differentiate into mature granulocytes by high concentrations of RA . ``
Differential screening techniques were used to identify sequences whose transcription can be induced in an immediate-early manner by exposure to RA .
Here we report the isolation and characterization of nine potential immediate-early sequences , one of which , E3 , is expressed selectively in myeloid , B-lymphoid , and erythroid cells .
Sequence analysis of the murine E3 promoter region revealed the presence of a single RA response element that appeared to confer RA-sensitivity on various promoter constructs in transient transfection experiments .
Taken together , these results suggest that E3 is a likely target of the activated RARa during myelopoiesis .
MATERIALS AND METHODS Tissue culture .
HL60 , HL6OR , HLGOR/RARa , Jurkat , K562 , Colo320-DM , MEL F3 , and MEL FLDS-19 cells were maintained in RPMI supplemented with 5 % fetal calf serum ( FCS ) .
MPRO cells were maintained in Dulbecco 's modified Eagle 's medium ( DMEM ) supplemented with 10 % FCS and 1 % CHO.HMS-conditioned media , used as a source of GM-CSF .
MPRO and HL6O-derived cells were induced to differentiate by application of 10 pmol/L RA .
For the induction of erythroid differentiation , MEL cells were cultured in the presence of 4 mmol/L hexamethylene bis-acetamide ( HMBA ) .
EML cells were maintained in Iscove 's modified Dulbecco 's medium ( IMDM ) and 20 % horse serum , supplemented with 200 ng/mL rat stem cell factor ( Amgen , Thousand Oaks , CA ) .
For induction of erythroid differentiation in EML cells , 8 U/mL erythropoietin was added to these culture conditions .
32D c13 cells were maintained in IMDM containing 10 % FCS and 5 % WEHI 3B-conditioned media as a source of interleukin-3 .
For granulocytic differentiation , 32D c13 cells were placed in IMDM and 10 % FCS containing 500 U/ mL G-CSF ( Amgen ) .
SP2 cells were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10 % FCS , and MPC-11 cells in 80 % DMEM and 20 % horse serum .
Mouse L and NIH 3T3 cells were maintained in DMEM and 10 % FCS .
RNA isolation and Northern blot analysis .
Total cellular RNA was isolated using the guanidinium isothiocyanate-cesium chloride precipitation procedure . ``
Polyadenylated transcripts were purified by two cycles of selection using oligo ( dT ) -cellulose spin columns ( 5'-3 ' Inc , Boulder , CO ) .
For Northern blot analysis , 10-ug samples of heat-denatured total RNA were separated by electrophoresis through 1 % agarose , 0.6 % formaldehyde , morpholinepropane-sul- SCOTT , MUELLER , AND COLLINS fonic acid ( MOPS ) denaturing gels , and transferred to nylon-sup-ported nitrocellulose ( Schleicher & Schuell , Keene , NH ) .
Filters were baked in vacuo at 80°C , then prehybridized for an hour at 42°C in 5 % SSC ; 25 mmol/L 1:1 Na , HPO , ; : NaH , PO , , ( pH 6.5 ) ; 0.02 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) ; 0.25 mg/mL yeast RNA ; 0.02 % Fi-coll-400 ; 0.02 % PVP and 50 % formamide , supplemented with 10 % dextran sulfate .
Radiolabeled probes ( 10 ' dpm ) generated by nick translation were heat-denatured , then added directly to the prehybridized filter and hybridized for 20 hours .
Filters were washed briefly at 65°C in 2 % SSC , 0.1 % sodium dodecyl sulfate ( SDS ) , then in 0.1 x SSC , 0.1 % SDS for 30 minutes and autoradiographed at -70°C .
The Northern blots in Figs 3A , 3B , and 4A were probed with the 2.466-kb murine E3 cDNA presented in Fig 2 , whereas the Northern blot presented in Fig 4B was probed with a 0.7-kb EcoRI fragment of the human E3 cDNA ( L.M.S .
, S.J.C .
, unpublished ) .
cDNA library preparation .
_ A directionally cloned cDNA library was constructed using the Uni-ZAP cloning kit ( Stratagene , La Jolla , CA ) and poly ( A ) *® mRNA isolated from MPRO-C cells ( see next paragraph ) stimulated by exposure for 2.5 hours to 10 mol/L RA and 1 pg/mL cycloheximide ( RA + CHX ) .
Five micrograms poly ( A ) * mRNA was used as the template for synthesis of first-strand cDNA , directed by an Xho T-oligo ( dT ) primer .
The resulting double-stranded hemi-methylated cDNA were ligated to phosphorylated EcoRI adapters , then digested with Xho I. Ligation of cDNA species greater than 0.5 kb in length into Xho I/EcoRI-digested UniZap phage vector and packaging with GigaPackII Gold packaging extract ( Stratagene , La Jolla , CA ) resulted in a primary library consisting of 9 x 10° recombinant phage .
Approximately 2 x 10° recombinants were amplified on NZYM-agarose plates to generate a stock with an approximate titer of 10 ' recombinants/mL .
To isolate full-length cDNA sequences , 5 ug poly ( A ) * mRNA isolated from murine 32D c13 cells was used to construct a directionally cloned cDNA library with the Uni-ZAP cDNA cloning kit .
Size-fractionated cDNAs in the range of 0.5 kb to greater than 8.0 kb in length were cloned into the UniZap phage vector , resulting in a cDNA library consisting of 2 x 10° independent recombinants .
Differential screening .
- We used two different MPRO subclones to synthesize high specific-activity , P-labeled first-strand cDNA probes to minimize the effect of any background spontaneous differentiation that could generate a false-positive hybridization pattern .
The subclone M-PRO BK/RF ( in this report referred to as MPRO-B ) is relatively resistant to RA , with no spontaneous differentiation in serum-cultured cells , whereas MPRO-C cells are more RA-re-sponsive , with a small level of spontaneous differentiation apparent in serum-cultured cells ( S. Tsai , unpublished observations ) .
Poly ( A ) * mRNA isolated from RA- and CHX-treated MPRO-C and from untreated MPRO-B cells was used as a template to synthesize the appropriate first-strand cDNA probes .
In a typical reaction , 0.3 mCi [ a- `` P ] dCTP ( 3,000 Ci/mmol ; New England Nuclear [ NEN ] , Boston , MA ) was dried down , and 2 ug each of twice-purified poly ( A ) * mRNA and oligo ( dT ; ; , ; ) primer ( Pharmacia , Piscataway , NJ ) added .
After heating the mRNA template to 70°C and cooling on ice , cDNA probes were synthesized at 42°C in buffer containing 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl , ( pH 8.3 ) ; 75 mmol/L KCI ; 3 mmol/L MgC1 ; ; 10 mmol/ L dithiothreitol ( DTT ) ; 1 mmol/L dATP ; 1 mmol/L dGTP ; 1 mmol/ L dTTP ; 40 U RNasin : ; and 400 U Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase .
Unlabeled dCTP was added to a 1 mmol/L concentration after 15 minutes , and the incubation continued for another hour , After alkali hydrolysis of its template , labeled cDNA was recovered by ethanol precipitation .
Approximately 4 x 10¢ recombinants of the primary MPRO-C ( RA + CHX ) cDNA library were plated at medium density on lawns of XL1-Blue MRF bacteria in 150-cm ' dishes ( 25 plaques/cm ' ) , and duplicate sets of plaque lifts taken using Hybond-N* nylon membrane ( Amersham , Arlington Heights , IL ) .
These lifts were hybridized with 2 x 10° cpm/ml of From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
HEMATOPOIETIC-SPECIFIC TARGET OF RARe the MPRO-B cDNA probe or the MPRO-C ( RA + CHX ) cDNA probe in 0.5 mol/L 2:1 Na ; , HPO , : NaH , PO , ; 7 % SDS ; 10 mmoV/L EDTA for 40 hours at 62°C ; washed briefly in 2x SSC , 0.1 % SDS ; then washed for 30 minutes at 62°C in 0.1 X SSC , 0.1 % SDS .
Autora-diographs from each matched pair of filters were obtained by exposure for 20 hours at -70°C , then compared by eye .
Those plaques hybridizing preferentially to the probe synthesized from ( RA + CHX ) -treated MPRO-C mRNA were rescreened twice , then plaque purified .
The cDNA inserts from recombinant phage of interest were excised in vivo by coinfection with ExAssist helper phage ( Stra-tagene ) to produce pBluescript clones , which were used for the initial sequence analysis .
Sequence analysis .
Double-stranded DNA obtained from phagemid clones were sequenced directly using T3 , T7 , or sequence-specific oligonucleotide primers with the Taq-Dye-Primer-Cycle sequencing kit ( Applied Biosystems , Foster City , CA ) and analyzed on an ABI 373A DNA Sequencer .
Initial homology searches were performed at NCBI against the GenBank ( release 87.0 ) , EMBL ( release 39.0 ) , and SwissProt ( release 30.0 ) databases using the BLAST network service . ``
Computer analysis of nucleotide sequences was performed using the MOTIFS and FindPatterns subroutines of the Genetics Computing Group ( GCG ; version 8.0 ) software .
Isolation of genomic clones .
The 2.65-kb E3 cDNA was used to screen 2 x 10° recombinants of a murine genomic library ( DNA from an inbred 129Sy mouse inserted into the vector , ADashID , provided by Glenn Friedrich ( Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center ) .
After three rounds of high stringency screening , four genomic clones consistently hybridized to the full-length E3 cDNA ; two of these additionally hybridized to a probe containing 0.2 kb of 5 ' E3 cDNA .
Clone E3.5 was restriction mapped and subcloned into pBluescript ( Stratagene ) , with subclones containing exon sequences identified by Southern blot analysis , then sequenced as described above .
Plasmid constructions .
_ A modified pBluescript , pBS ( HBgNcS ) , in which single Bg/ll and Nco I sites had been inserted between the HindIII and Sai I sites of the pBluescript polylinker , was created using complementary oligonucleotides . ``
The E3.5 genomic clone , which contains the murine E3 exon I ( encoding residues 1 through 29 ) , flanked by 3.5 kb of upstream sequence and 9 kb of the first intron , was digested with EcoRV and Nco I , with a resulting 0.9-kb fragment containing the 5 ' untranslated region cloned into similarly digested pBS ( HBgNcS ) .
The Neo I site , which spans the initiating ATG of the murine E3 gene , was then eliminated by digestion with mung bean nuclease .
The E3 genomic fragment was released by BamHI and Sal I digestion , and ligated into pUC19LUC® to produce pO.7E3LUC .
Unique Bg/II and HindIII sites present within this portion of the promoter were used to generate pODAE3LUC and p0.2E3LUC , respectively .
The pQ.4E3CAT and pO.2E3CAT vectors were constructed in an identical manner using the pCAT-enhancer reporter plasmid ( Promega , Madison , WI ) .
p ( -394 to -373 mE3 ) ; T KCAT was created by cloning a 52-bp fragment , ( -394 to -373 mE3 ) , into HindlH , Sal linearized pTKCAT . ``
This double-stranded ( -394 to -373 mE3 ) ; fragment was synthesized by annealing complementary oligonucleotides that contain direct repeats of the putative murine E3 RA response element , present in the E3 promoter between nucleotides -394 and -378 ( as underlined ) , flanked by HindIII and Saf I restriction sites included for subsequent cloning purposes .
The sequences of the two oligonucleotides used are S'AGCTTACAGAGTGAGTTCCAGGACAGCCAGGAGTG-AGTTCCAGGACAGCCAG3 ' , - and STCGACTGGCTGTCCT-GGAACTCACTCCTGGCTGTCCTGGAACTCACTCTGTAY ' .
Transient transfection analysis .
- For each transfection of K562 , Jurkat and Colo320-DM cells , 10° cells were washed twice and resuspended in a final volume of 0.5 mL HEPES-buffered saline .
A 50-ug aliquot of test plasmid and a 10-ug aliquot of the control 2519 plasmid , SV ; , CAT , `` was added , then the cells immediately subjected to a 250-V , 960-uF pulse using a BioRad Gene Pulser , and placed in culture medium containing 10 % FCS .
Transfected cells were obtained for luciferase and chloramphenicol acetyltransferase ( CAT ) assays 40 hours later .
Transient transfections of HL6O cells were accomplished using a variation of a method described elsewhere . ``
For each transfection , 10° cells were washed in chilled OptiMem buffer ( GIBCO , Grand Island , NY ) , and resuspended in a final volume of 0.5 mL .
A 50-4ug aliquot of test plasmid was added , then incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes .
Cells were subjected to a 300-V , 960-uF pulse using the Gene Pulser , placed in culture medium containing stripped FCS , and harvested for CAT assays 40 hours later .
Where appropriate , RA was added to a final concentration of 10 pmol/L 20 hours after transfection .
Luciferase and CAT assays were performed essentially as described previously . ``
'' Cells were washed twice in 5 mL chilled 0.1 mol/L Tris-HCI ( pH 7.8 ) , resuspended in 100 0.1 mol/L Tris-HC ] ( pH 7.8 ) ; 1 mmol/L DTT ; 0.1 mg/mL BSA , and lysed by several rounds of rapid freezing and thawing .
After centrifugation at 15,0008 for 5 minutes , 76 gL of each extract isolated from cells transfected with luciferase-based reporter constructs was mixed with 24 pL 46 mmol/L MgCl1 ; ; 25 mmol/L ATP , and assayed for luciferase activity for a period of 10 seconds after injection of 100 wL 0.3 mg/mL luciferin by an AutoLumat LB953 luminometer ( EG & G Berthold ) .
The remaining extract was incubated at 56°C for 15 minutes , then centrifuged briefly .
A 20-zL aliquot of the supernatant was added to an 80-uL mix containing 18 ug butyryl coenzyme-A , 0.15 uCi ( NEN ) , and 0.1 moll Tris-HCI ( pH 7.8 ) .
After incubation at 37°C for 2 hours , each CAT assay was extracted with 200 LL xylene , then back-extracted once with 100 LL TE ( 10 mmol/L Tris-HCl , pH 8.0 ; 1 mmol/L EDTA ) , added to 2 mL scintil-lant and counted for 1 minute .
Extracts derived from cells that were transfected with CAT-based reporter constructs were processed essentially as above , with the exception that an aliquot of cell extract containing 50 pg total protein was used for CAT assay analysis .
The protein levels of each extract were determined before CAT assay analysis by protein determination of a 5-uL sample of cell extract using a modified Bradford procedure ( BioRad Protein Assay ) .
GenBank accession numbers .
- The GenBank accession nutaber for the murine E3 cDNA sequence is U29539 , and for the murine promoter sequence is U29489 .
RESULTS Identification and characterization of RA-inducible immediate-early genes .
To identify novel RA-inducible sequences , we initially constructed a directional cDNA library from the poly ( A ) * mRNA of MPRO-C cells treated for 2.5 hours with all-trans RA in the presence of CHX .
The addition of CHX allowed us to restrict our analysis to RNA species that are stimulated as a direct response to RA , without intervening protein synthesis .
For differential screening of this cDNA library , we used cDNA probes synthesized from mRNA from uninduced MPRO-B cells or MPRO-C cells induced to differentiate by treatment with RA and CHX for 2.5 hours .
Forty-five clones of the 40,000 clones screened exhibited preferential hybridization to the cDNA probe derived from RA- and CHX-treated MPRO-C cells .
After several rounds of screening , 20 clones with a strong differential hybridization pattern were selected for further analysis .
Cross-hybridization determined that these clones corresponded to 12 discrete cDNA species , 8 of which were identified as novel sequences after searches of the GenBank , EMBL , and SwissProt databases .
Six displayed significant From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
2520 SCOTT , MUELLER , AND COLLINS Table 1 .
Summary of the Sequence Identity and Expression Pattern of Eight Differentially Expressed cDNA Sequences Analyzed Northern Blot Analysis MPRO-C ( RA + CHX ) Clone Protein/Nucleotide Homology ( % ) V MPRO-B* RA- or CHX-Inducible ?
A4 Rat clathrin light chain 2 ( 90 ) X2.43 RA A7 Human dUPT pyrophosphatase ( 80 ) X3.11 Neither B3 Human expressed sequence tag ( 75 ) X3.82 Neither C3 Ubiquitin conjugating enzymes ( 65 ) X2.29 Neither D9 Novel - X2.02 RA E3 Novel - xX3.06 RA G1 Human expressed sequence tag ( 75 ) X2.73 Neither G4 Human histone HH 3.3 ( 100 ) X4.51 CHX ® Level of induction calculated using densitometric scans of Northern blots .
homology to database sequences , with 4 ( A4 , A7 , C3 , G4 ) being probable murine homologs of rat or human sequences , and two ( G1 , B3 ) being apparently novel members of two multi-member gene families ( Table 1 ) .
Two clones , D9 and E3 , bore no significant homology to database sequences , suggesting that these were truly unique transcripts .
To ascertain which clones corresponded to mRNAs that were transcriptionally upregulated in response to RA , each of the 12 cDNAs was used to probe total RNA isolated from the MPRO-B and MPRO-C subclones , the latter of which was treated with RA and CHX for 2.5 hours .
Northern blot analysis showed that three transcripts were equally abundant in these RNA populations , and were therefore not studied .
Nine sequences were preferentially expressed in the MPRO-C RNA population , with transcript level differences ranging from twofold to almost fivefold ( Fig 1A ) .
To rule out the 2 .
3. io di dib iv 4. io db dib iv 5. i ib dil iv possibility that the levels of these transcripts increase in response to CHX rather than to RA , we hybridized the nine cDNA probes to total RNA obtained from MPRO-C cells incubated for 2.5 hours in culture medium alone , medium plus RA , medium plus CHX , or medium plus RA and CHX .
Only mRNAs that were upregulated in response to RA or superinduced by the addition of RA and CHX were considered for further analysis .
These Northern blots showed that the G4 cDNA , which encodes the murine homolog of the human histone variant , H3.3 , was induced by CHX treatment alone ( Fig 1B5 ) .
Four RNA species identified as more abundant in MPRO-C cells relative to MPRO-B cells did not appear to be RA-inducible ( data not shown ) , but instead varied in abundance between the subclones .
However , Northern blot analysis identified four mRNA species that appeared to be upregulated directly by RA in MPRO-C cells Fig 1 .
The expression patterns of five cDNAs isolated by differential screening .
( A ) The expression of candidate target sequences , A4 ( 1 ) , D9 ( 2 ) , E3 ( 3 ) , F1 ( 4 ) , and G4 ( 5 ) , were examined in MPRO-B cells ( - ) and MPRO-C cells treated with 10 wmol/L RA and CHX for 2.5 hours ( + ) , using the appropriate cDNAs isolated by differential screening as probes .
( B ) The RA- and CHX-inducibility of A4 ( 1 ) , D9 ( 2 ) , E3 ( 3 ) , F1 ( 4 ) , and G4 ( 5 ) transcripts in MPRO-C cells incubated for 2.5 hours in serum ( i ) , serum plus RA ( ii ) , serum plus CHX ( iii ) , or serum plus RA and CHX ( iv ) , was examined as above .
i ii iii iv From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
HEMATOPOIETIC-SPECIFIC TARGET OF RAR « Fig 2 .
The murine E3 cDNA sequence and predicted protein .
The 2,466-nucleotide E3 cDNA contains two large nonoverlapping open reading frames , the first of which is conceptually translated .
Six potential sites for phosphorylation by protein kinase C or casein kinase i } are noted { in bold typeface ) , as are the two potential N-myristylation sites .
The second open reading frame lies between nucleotides 1324 and 1971 , and is marked by underlining , as is the single ATTTA - destabilization motif and the intact polyadeny !
- 973 1054 1135 1216 1297 1378 1459 1540 1621 1702 1783 1864 1945 2026 2107 2188 2269 2350 2521 GTTACTCAGAGCACTCCGAAGAGGGGACTGCGCACCATGGCCTCCCGAGCAGCGCCGGTCAGACAGACATGCTCGITGTTIC M A S R A A P V R Q T C C CF AACATCCGAGTCGCCACCATAGCCCTGGCCATTTACCACATAGTCATGAGTGTCCTGCTGTICATTGAGCATGTGGTGGAG NOI Ro V G T I A L A I Y H I V M S V L L F .I E H V V E v A ROG K V 8 C R F F K M A Y L R M A D L L S S F L L ATTGGCGTGCTCTTCATCATCAGCATCAGCCTGCTGTTCGGCGTGGTCAAGAACCGGGAGAACGTACCTGATACCCTTCCTG I G V L F I I S I S L L F G V V K N R E K Y L I P F L TCCCTTCAAATCATGGACTTCCTGCICTGCCTGCTCACACTGCTGSGCTCCTACATCGAGTTGCCAGCGTACTTGAAGCTT § L Q I M D F L L C L L T L L G 8 ¥ I E L P A Y L K L A R S R P G P S K V P L M T L Q L L D P C L § I L T L TGCAGCTCCTACATGGAAGTGCCCACCTACCTCAACTTCAAGTCCATGAACCACATGAATTACCTCCCAAGCCAGGAGGGT C s s Y MoE V POT Y L N F K S M N H M N Y L P S Q E g GCTGCCGCACAGCCAGTTCATCAACATGATGCTCATCTTCTCAGTGGCCTTTATCACCGTGCTCATCCTGAAGGTCTACATG v P H S Q F I N M M L I F Ss V A F I T V L I L K V Y M TTCAAGTGTGTGTACACATGCTACAAATTCTTGAAGCACATGAATTCGSCCATGGAGGACAGCAGCTCCAAGATGTTCCTC FK C V Y T C Y K F L K H M N 8 A M E D S S S K M F L AAGGTGGCTCTGCC @ TCCTACGAGGAAGCCTTGTCTCTGCCCCCTAAGACTCCAGAGGGGGACCCTGCACCACCCCCaATAC KV A L P s Y E E A L S L PP K T PE G D P A P P P Y TCAGAAGTGTGATCCCCACCAGGCCTTTAGCCCTTGGGCTGGGAGAGGCAGAACTTCCTCCTCCTeCTTCTTCACTTIGGT § E v * CAACTGAGTCACCCTGGGCTCAGTGACCCTTTGCGGCTCAGGATACTCAGCCTAGCAGCCCGTCTCGTCTICCATCAGCAGT GACACTTGTTCAGAGCGCAGCCATAGGAACTTAGGCTCGCCTTTGCTTAACAGCTACCGGCTTGATCTGTITTGGCCAGGCAG CAGCAGGAAGAGAATCTGGCCAAGCAATAGTTCCTGGTGTCAGTTTATACTCAGCTGTCAGACGACAGGATGGGTCATGAT TGTGGTGCCCGTTTGCCACCTCCAGTACCCCAAAGAGTGTACAAACAAAACAATTCCTTCAAATAGCTTGCTTﬁAATAGCG Iﬂxﬂxﬂ3ﬂEBAAIAA3SCg1EEECAIGAGCCACTGGTCHGATGGGAAGCTGTCCﬂ1ﬂHEHTCAGTCAAGTGTTEIISﬂGGG GTTGCTTCAGCTTGCTTGCCCTGGGCTACGCTCAGGGGATGGCAGCTTTGGACGTTGGCCGCCCTGGGGGTGGCTeTCTeTC ACTATGGCTGCCCAGTTGGGGCAGGCTAGCCTATGSGCTGTGAAGACTTGGCCAGAGTCATGTGTTCTATGGTGGCAGCAA GAGGGTCAGTTCATATGCCTCTGCTGGCTTTTCTATCGCTAGGGGTTGCTAGGGGTTGCTAGGGATCTACACCCTGCCTGT GGGTGTAGATGGGGCTGCAGGGCTGAAAAGTTCCCACTGTACCTGTGTCATTGCTTGTGTATGACTTGGAAGAAGGCCCAA ation signal .
2431 ( Figs 1B1 , 1B2 , 1B3 , 1B4 ) .
Upregulation of these was independent of de novo protein synthesis , suggesting that transcription of these sequences may be induced directly by RARa .
In this report , we have chosen to examine the E3 cDNA sequence in further detail .
Sequence analysis of the murine E3 cDNA .
- The E3 cDNA isolated by differential screening was 1.2 kb in length , whereas Northern blot analysis indicated that this transcript was approximately 2.5 kb in length .
To isolate the full-length cDNA , the original E3 cDNA was used to probe 50,000 recombinants of a primary murine myeloid cDNA library constructed for this purpose from the poly ( A ) *® mRNA of 32D c13 cells .
Seven clones consistently hybridized to the 1.2 kb E3 cDNA probe after three rounds of screening , with the longest insert obtained being 2,466 nucleotides in length ( Fig 2 ) .
The E3 cDNA sequence contains two large nonoverlapping open reading frames , the first of which ( ORFA ) is preceded by an untranslated leader sequence of 36 nucleotides .
The sequence surrounding the first potential initiating ATG codon is in close agreement with the consensus sequence for these sites , `` and is followed by an open reading frame of 783 nucleotides that potentially encodes a 261-residue polypeptide with a predicted mass of 29.6 kD .
Analysis of the predicted ORFA protein by the GCG subroutine MOTIFS identified two potential sites for protein kinase C-mediated phosphorylation , ** and four potential sites for phosphorylation by casein kinase II . ``
N-myristylation sites at resi- TAAAGCAACTGCAAGCTTTAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA dues 83 and 177 were identified as the only other structural motifs present within this open reading frame . ``
Computer-assisted hydropathy analysis indicated that the ORFA polypeptide consists of a series of strongly hydrophobic domains , dictated by the presence of a high number of hydrophobic residues and a concordant under-representation of hydrophilic residues , excepting 25 serine residues .
ORFA is terminated by an in-frame stop codon present at nucleotide 820 that is followed by 506 nucleotides of untranslated sequence , and a second open reading frame ( ORFB ) initiated by an imperfect Kozak sequence .
ORFB potentially encodes a polypeptide of 215 amino acids with a predicted molecular weight of 22.7 kD , and is distinguished by the presence of thirteen repeats of a 36-nucleo-tide sequence .
As these are in-frame relative to the initiating ATG , the putative ORFB polypeptide would include 13 direct repeats of a proline- and histidine-rich sequence , GAPPTTHW-SAHH .
After the ORFB termination codon at nucleotide 1969 , there is a further 494 nucleotides of untranslated sequence that includes a single ATTTA destabilization motif , which has been shown to confer instability on the transcripts of many transiently expressed sequences , including those of various cyto-kines and immediate-early response proteins . ``
The 3 ' untranslated region ends with a poly ( A ) tail of at least 17 adenosine residues preceded by an intact AATAAA polyadenylation signal . ``
Database homology searches indicated the predicted 261- From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
2522 residue ORFA protein is unique , with 28 % identity and 52 % similarity to a 233-residue putative protein encoded by the humORF13 cDNA ( GenBank accession no .
D14696 ) .
Similar homology searches suggested the predicted ORFB polypeptide is also unique , with 38 % identity and 46 % similarity to a developmentally regulated Trypanosoma cruzi neuraminidase ( GenBank accession no .
M61732 ) , `` `` although this homology was limited to similarities between a long tandem-repeat domain within the neuraminidase that consists of a variable number of repeats with the consensus , STPSTPXDSSAH , and the proline/histidine repeats present within the ORFB polypeptide .
Although both E3 open reading frames encode potential polypeptides with homology to one other protein , several observations suggest the ORFA encodes the E3 protein .
Although probes specific to either open reading frame detected transcripts on low-stringency Northern blots of human HL6O RNA , the human transcript detected by the ORFA probe was of similar size to the murine E3 transcript , whereas the human transcript detected by the ORFB probe was at least 7 kb in length ( data not shown ) .
Furthermore , low-stringency screening of an HL60 eDNA library with the ORFA cDNA probe led to the isolation of two 2.1-kb cDNAs that contain a single large open reading frame that is 82 % homologous at the nucleotide level to the murine E3 ORFA ( L.M.S .
, S.J.C .
, unpublished ) .
This open reading frame encodes a 262-residue polypeptide with 80 % identity and 90 % similarity to the murine E3 ORFA polypeptide .
There was no appreciable homology to the murine ORFB present within the human cDNA sequence .
The E3 transcript is restricted to hematopoietic cell types .
RNAs were isolated from a wide variety of adult mouse tissues , including the gut , heart , kidney , liver , lung , BM .
skeletal muscle , pancreas , skin , spleen , and thymus .
Northern blot analysis of 10-ug RNA samples from each tissue showed that E3 transcripts could be detected at significant levels in the BM and spleen , with a much lower level present in the thymus ( Fig 3A ; lanes 6 , 10 , and 11 ) .
The restricted expression pattern observed suggested that E3 expression may be limited to cells of hematopoietic origin , as all nonhematopoietic tissues examined did not contain detectable levels of the E3 mRNA .
To examine this apparently restricted expression pattern further , a variety of murine cell lines were examined for the presence of E3 transcripts ( Fig 3B ) .
Once again , E3 transcripts were limited to cells of the myeloid , erythroid , and B-lymphoid lineages , with no E3 mRNA detected in fibroblast cells .
Interestingly , within various hematopoietic lineages E3 levels were regulated either positively or negatively by the application of various differentiating agents .
For example , induction of erythroid differentiation in EML cells `` by exposure to erythropoietin resulted in significant reduction in E3 mRNA levels ( lanes 6 through 8 ) , as did the HMBA-mediated induction of erythroid differentiation in MEL cells ( lanes 11 through 14 ) .
E3 transcription was upregulated during myeloid differentiation specifically in response to RA , as observed in MPRO cells ( lanes 1 and 2 ) , with E3 levels remaining constant in 32D c13 cells induced to differentiate by G-CSF .
In addition , the observation that there is a twofold difference in the levels of E3 mRNA present between the relatively immature SP2 SCOTT , MUELLER , AND COLLINS A 1 2 3 4 50 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 2 3 4 5° 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 whew an t a ~ > - dpat @ - t f od a Fig 3 .
- Tissue distribution of the E3 transcript .
( A ) Aliquots of RNA , isolated from the ( 1 ) gut , ( 2 ) heart , ( 3 ) kidney , ( 4 ) liver , ( 5 ) lung , ( 6 ) BM , ( 7 ) skeletal muscle , ( 8 ) pancreas , ( 9 ) skin , ( 10 ) spleen , and ( 11 ) thymus of a 146-day adult mouse , were examined for E3 transcripts by Northern blot analysis , using the full-length murine E3 cDNA probe .
( B ) Murine cell-lines , including MPRO cells ( 1 ) exposed to 10 jumol/L RA for 1 day ( 2 ) , 32D c13 ( 3 ) induced by G-CSF for 2 days ( 4 ) or 4 days ( 5 ) , EML cells ( 6 ) induced by Epo for 3 days ( 7 ) or 5 days ( 8 ) , SP2 ( 9 ) , MPC-11 ( 10 ) , MEL FLDS-19 cells ( 11 ) induced by 4 mmol/ L HMBA for 4 days ( 12 ) , MEL F3 cells ( 13 ) induced by 4 mmol/L HMBA for 4 days ( 14 ) , NIH-3T3 ( 15 ) and L skin fibroblasts ( 16 ) , were examined for the presence of E3 transcripts by Northern blot analysis , using the full-length murine E3 cDNA as probe .
The ethidium bromide-stained gels are included for normalization purposes .
cells and the more mature Ig-secreting MPC-11 cells ( lanes 9 and 10 ) suggests that it is possible that E3 transcription is developmentally regulated during B lymphogenesis .
RA induction of E3 transcription .
- Direct evidence that the murine E3 is an immediate-early gene and therefore a possible direct target of RA receptors was obtained by examining the kinetics of E3 transcript accumulation in MPRO cells in response to RA .
These cells were cultured in media containing serum , then exposed to 10 Lwmol/L RA for different periods of time , and harvested for RNA ( Fig 4A ) .
Northern blot analysis showed that E3 transcript levels increase in an immediate-early response to RA , peaking after approximately 60 minutes , then decreasing toward steady-state levels within 4 hours of the addition of RA .
Interestingly , after only 15 minutes of exposure , the level of E3 mRNA increased , suggesting a rapid transcriptional induc-tion .
The observation that maximal E3 levels were threefold that in nontreated MPRO cells is consistent with the Northern blot analysis presented in Fig 1 .
From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
HEMATOPOIETIC-SPECIFIC TARGET OF RAR 2523 Fig 4 .
- RA-inducibility of E3 transcription .
( A ) The kinetics of E3 accumulation in MPRO cells in response to RA exposure were examined by Northern blot analysis with the full-length murine E3 cDNA probe .
MPRO cells were cultured in media containing fetal calf serum ( 1 ) , with 10 mol/L RA added for 15 minutes ( 2 ) , 30 minutes ( 3 ) , 1 hour ( 4 ) , 2 hours ( 5 ) , or 4 hours ( 6 ) before harvesting .
( B ) The E3 mRNA levels were examined in RA-responsive HL60 cells ( 1 ) exposed to 10 wmol/L RA for 24 hours ( 2 ) , 48 hours ( 3 ) , or 72 hours ( 4 ) , in RA-resistant HL6OR cells ( 5 ) exposed to 10 mol/L RA for 24 hours ( 6 ) , and in HL6OR cells stably transfected with RAR « ( 7 ) exposed to 10 mol/L RA for 24 hours ( 8 ) .
A 0.7-kb EcoRl fragment of the 2.2-kb human E3 cDNA was used as probe .
The ethidium bromide-stained gels are included for normalization purposes .
We have used cells of the RA-resistant HLGOR cell line to further demonstrate the RA-dependent transcription of the E3 gene .
HL6OR cells are unable to respond to RA because of the presence of reduced-affinity RARa molecules produced by a point mutation in the RARa gene . '
'' The E3 transcript level in HL6OR cells was directly compared with that in the parental HL6O cells and in a variant HL6OR cell line generated by retroviral-mediated transduction of a functional RARa gene into HL6OR cells ( Fig 4B ) .
E3 transcript levels in HL60 cells were induced several-fold following exposure to RA for 24 hours .
In contrast , the E3 transcript level in HL6OR cells failed to increase after 24 hours exposure to RA ( lanes 5 and 6 ) , whereas HL6OR cells transduced with RARa displayed a significant increase in E3 mRNA levels after 24 hours exposure to RA ( lanes 7 and 8 ) .
These observations suggest that RA and RARa play a direct role in the transcriptional regulation of E3 in the HL60 myeloid leukemia cell line .
The E3 promoter directs tissue-specific transcription .
The full-length E3 cDNA was used to isolate E3 genomic clones from a murine genomic library .
After three rounds of screening , four clones hybridized to the full-length cDNA , of which two also hybridized to a probe containing the extreme 5 ' portion of this cDNA , indicating they were likely to contain at least part of the E3 promoter .
Clones E3.5 and E3.20 , which contain 14 kb of murine DNA that overlap by 5 kb , were restriction mapped , subcloned , then sequenced .
Clone E3.5 includes approximately 3.5 kb of genomic sequence upstream of the first exon , part of which is presented in Fig 5 .
This region features numerous elements characteristic of eukaryotic promoters and their regulatory regions .
A TATA box ( TATAAA ) is apparent beginning 41 bases upstream of the putative transcription initiation site at position +1 , which was located by primer extension ( data not shown ) .
The location of the transcription initiation site 210 bp up stream of the initiating ATG indicated that the full-length E3 transcript is 2,640 nucleotides in length , 174 nucleotides longer than the cDNA sequence presented in Fig 2 .
The 5 ' untranslated region contains three termination codons , one of which is in-frame relative to ORFA , suggesting the first methionine present in Fig 2 is the initiating methionine .
Analysis of this promoter sequence has identified multiple potential regulatory elements , including the DNA-binding motifs for E2 , `` TCF2a , `` AP2 , `` IRF1 and IRF2 , `` ~° and GATA family `` `` transcription factors .
Unique potential binding sites for NFB , `` and SRF `` are located farther upstream ( data not shown ) .
The promoter contains several regions of repetitive DNA , including two arrays containing multimers of an AC dinucleotide repeat , and a region upstream of the TATA box that contains 16 direct repeats of the pentameric sequence , CA ( A/G ) AC .
A potential RA response element consisting of two half-sites , GAGTGA and AGGACA , separated by 5 bp can be identified between nucleotides -394 and -378 .
There is a third potential half-site located 5 bases downstream of the second , giving this response element a structure similar to that present in the murine laminin B1 gene , which consists of two closely arranged half-sites separated from a third by 14 bases . ``
To show that the E3 promoter is transcriptionally active in certain cell types , three luciferase-based reporter plasmids were constructed .
An EcoRV/Nco I restriction fragment of this promoter corresponding to the sequence -703 to +209 was ligated into pUCI9LUC to generate pO.7E3LUC , with the Bg/II ( -428 ) and HindIII ( -221 ) restriction sites present used to make pO.4E3LUC and pO.2E3LUC , respectively ( Fig 6A ) .
Aliquots of each construct were transiently transfected into three cell lines : the E3-positive myeloid/erythroid K562 cell-line , and two E3-negative cell-lines , Jurkat ( T lymphoid ) and Colo320-DM ( colonic epithelium ) .
There was a high level of reporter ac From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
2524 SCOTT , MUELLER , AND COLLINS -711 - AATATCTGATATCCAGAATATCTGATATGTGACTCCCATGAAAGCCGTCGGCCGACCCCTGCGACAGGTTA EcoRV -642 - TGATCCACAGGTTGAGAATTACTACTCTAGAGCCAGTTGGCCTCCGTTCCAGTCCCCACTCCTTTTPAG ~573 _ ACTATCTTGGTGACTGCAAGGGAGAAATGGCTTCATCCTGTGCCTCCATTTTTTCATCTGTGCAGTGGG E2A -504 .
.
CATAAGAATAGCACCTCCTCCTGGCAAGTGACAGTATACGCCTTTAATCCCAACACTTGSTAGGGAGAA Fig 5 .
Nucleotide sequence GATA IRF of the murine E3 promoter .
Ap -- 435 - GACGCCAGATCTCTATAAGTTTGACGGCCACCCTGCTCTACAGAGTCACTTCCAGCACAGCCAGGGCTCA proximately 1 kb f ) , the mﬁri ; BglII RARE RARE h -366 - ACAAAGAAACCoTacccoccccopecceaccocAaAAcCAaAAccAAAccAcaccacaccAaAccaaaceaa _ £3 Promoter was determined by Ap2 direct sequence analysis of the -297 - AcCAAAcCcAAACCAAACeAAACCAAACcAAACcaAAccaAAcAGTeceTccctecAAcAccccAceraa - @ enomic clone E3.5 .
The TATA box is underlined , as is the Kozak -228 - CGAGCTAAGCTTCACAGCATCTCGAAGGAGCAGTTTACTGCAGACGCTACTGTTTTTACAAccAGACAcAr - Sequence that includes the ini-HindIII tiating ATG and a number of po -- 159 - TPEAGTPTGAATCCTTCCATTAGAACTACTGTTTCATTAGGCACAGATTTCCATATCGGATTCTPP » PPc __ tential transcription factor DNA-binding recognition sequences , -90 _ TAGAAAACGGCTTCTAGCGCGCTCTTCAGCATCCAGCAACCACAGCTCCATATAAATcCGaaccccacec _ identified using the GCG subrou-SP1 TCF-20 TATA BOX tine FindPatterns , that includes -21 - - E2A , Sp1 , and members of the +1 GATA , RAR , and ( RF families .
49 - TCCCTCCCCTGCAGCTECTACAACCCAGACTTACAGACCTGGCCCCTACCGTCTGAGGGCAAGCCCCAA - The single transcription initia-EZA tion site mapped by primer ex-118 - CTGACCCACGCCAGCCTCTGocTTCcTcTrTTITGTTCTECTGTGGGCCCAAGACTCCTTACTCAGAGCA _- tension is identified by bold let-IRF AP2 tering .
Multiple repeats of the 187 - CTCCGAAGAGGGGACTGCGCACCATG pentamer CA ( A/G ) AC are in ital-KOZAK ics .
tivity detected for all three E3-based reporter constructs transfected into K562 cells ( Fig 6B ) .
The constructs pQO.7E3LUC and pO.4E3LUC were significantly more active in K562 cells than in either Colo320-DM or Jurkat cells , consistent with the tissue distribution of the E3 transcript .
Interestingly , pQ.4E3LUC was at least two times more active in K562 cells than was pO.7E3LUC , suggesting that part of the promoter present in pO.7E3LUC but not in p0.4E3LUC may negatively regulate E3 transcription in K562 cells .
Removal of a further 200 bp from the 5 ' region of the E3 promoter , to generate pO.2E3LUC , resulted in a sevenfold reduction in promoter activity , an effect that is possibly mediated by the potential RA response element .
Although the E3 promoter constructs were transcriptionally active in Jurkat and Colo320-DM cells , which do not appear to express E3 , the activity of each construct was only several-fold that of the minimal promoter construct , pTKLUC .
It is possible that E3 transcription is normally prevented in colonic epithelial cells and T lymphocytes by the expression of a repressor molecule that was unable to function in these in vitro assays .
The inclusion of flanking sequences further upstream or downstream of the E3 gene may facilitate the mapping of DNA elements that mediate the repression of E3 transcription in these cells .
The murine E3 promoter is RA responsive .
The RA-inducibility of the E3 promoter was explored by transfection of the pO.A4E3CAT and pO.2E3CAT constructs into HL6O and HL6OR cells ( Fig 7A ) .
pOQ.A4E3CAT , which contains the potential RA response element , had a high level of reporter activity in HL60 cells cultured in stripped serum , being 75-fold more active than pTKCAT .
The activity of pO.4E3CAT increased 2.3-fold after exposure of the transfected HL6O cells to RA , suggesting the presence of a functional RA response element within this construct .
The degree of E3 induction observed is consistent with previous Northern blot analysis ( Figs 1 and 4 ) , which demonstrated that E3 transcript levels treble after RA exposure .
In contrast , no RA-induced enhancement of pO.4E3CAT was noted in transfected HL6GOR cells , which harbor nonfunctional RARa mol-ecules .
Removal of the promoter region that includes the putative RA response element abolished the RA-induced increase in reporter activity in HL60 cells , effectively localizing the sequence responsible for RA responsiveness to within nucleotides -428 and -221 of the E3 promoter ( Fig 7A ) .
The RA-inducibility of the E3 promoter was paralleled by that of the putative RA response element itself , which was tested by transient transfection of p ( -394 to -373 mE3 ) ; TKCAT ( Fig 7B ) .
This reporter construct contains two direct repeats of the putative E3 RA response element cloned upstream of the minimal pTKCAT reporter construct .
p ( RRE ) , TKCAT , which contains four direct repeats of the RA response element , and pTKCAT were included for comparative purposes .
In HL60 cells cultured in the presence of stripped serum , p ( RRE ) , TKCAT and p ( -394 to -373 mE3 ) ; TKCAT had similar reporter activities to that of the pTKCAT construct .
However , there was a significant increase in the reporter activities of both constructs following the application of 10 pmol/L RA for 24 hours .
In three experiments , p ( RRE ) , TKCAT had a mean increase in reporter activity of 9.4-fold after exposure to RA , whereas p ( ~394 to -373 mE3 ) ; TKCAT had a more modest 2.4-fold increase in reporter activity .
The RA-responsiveness of the p ( -394 to -373 mE3 ) ; TKCAT reporter construct was very similar to that of pO.4E3CAT , suggesting that this region of the murine E3 promoter is primarily responsible for the upregulation of E3 transcription observed in response to RA .
DISCUSSION RA and its receptor , RARa , have been implicated in hematopoietic regulation by multiple lines of evidence , al From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
HEMATOPOIETIC-SPECIFIC TARGET OF RAR 2525 A te GAGTGA ... ..AGGACA +1 r ( T T T -703 428 321 41 +209 EcoRV Bglll TATA Neo !
0.7E3LUC # ( & { Eve ) 0.4E3LUC # * - { Euc ] 0.2E3LUC 04E3CAT P ( & CAT 0.2E3CAT CAT Fig 6 .
The E3 promoter constructs are transcriptionally active in hematopoietic cells .
( A ) The structural features of the murine E3 promoter region used to construct the five E3 reporter plasmids is de-picted .
The locations of the TATA box and transcription initiation site are indicated , as are the EcoRV , and HindIll restriction sites used to construct p0.7E3LUC , p0.4E3LUC , p0.4E3CAT , p0.2E3LUC , and p0.2E3CAT .
The position of the putative RA response element is indicated by the solid box .
( B ) The reporter activity of three constructs introduced into the indicated cell lines is displayed .
In each case , the mean relative light units ( RLU ) measured in four experiments , after normalization of the CAT levels , is presented , with the mean RLUs measured for pTKLUC set arbitrarily at 1.0. though the mechanisms by which RA exerts its effect on granulocytic differentiation remain unclear .
It is anticipated that the identification of genes that are transcriptionally regulated directly by RARa or by RAR/RXR heterodimers during RA-induced granulocytic differentiation may assist in elucidation of the processes involved in differentiation .
Here we report the isolation of a candidate gene exhibiting early RA-induced upregulation during promyelocytic differentiation .
The number of genes identified as being induced by RA in an immediate-early manner is surprisingly low , although differential screening has successfully identified several RA-inducible transcripts . ``
However , it is likely that many of these sequences are regulated as an indirect response to RA , as they were isolated by strategies that favor the itentifica-tion of delayed-response transcripts .
RA-inducible transcripts have been identified in several hematopoietic cell-types , °* `` `` `` `` although in most instances it is also unclear whether these are the direct targets of RARa .
Analysis of two RA-inducible genes , CD18 and CD11b , has failed to identify classic RA response elements within their respective promoter regions , suggesting that the transcriptional upregulation observed in response to RA may be mediated by factors other than RA receptors .
`` * `` `` The paucity of RA target genes identified by differential 04E3LUC E I 6 : a* o 2E3LuUC [ * TKLUC 0 20 40 60 80 Relative light units screening techniques may result from the inherent limitations of analysing large representative cDNA libraries , and may be complicated by the requirement that cells be cultured in the presence of serum , which contains physiologically significant levels of RA .
Presumably , the level of serum RA is sufficient to induce transcription of RA-inducible genes , preventing their subsequent isolation by this method .
Unfor-tunately , the procedures available to remove endogenous RA inadvertently remove other serum constituents important for continued growth of most cells .
To avoid this problem , we have instead made use of the promyelocytic MPRO cell line , which is particularly suited for differential screening because its cells remain arrested as promyelocytes when cultured under normal serum conditions , but may be rapidly induced to differentiate into granulocytes by an increase in the concentration of RA present to 10 mol/L .
With this inducible system , nine differentially expressed sequences were isolated from a cDNA library constructed from the mRNA of MPRO cells treated for 2.5 hours with RA and CHX , four of which appear to be regulated directly by RARa in MPRO cells .
Transcript levels of one of these genes , which we have named E3 , trebled in response to RA in the presence of CHX , implying that E3 may be a direct target of the activated RARa .
From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
2526 SCOTT , MUELLER , AND COLLINS A HL60 5 0.4E3CAT 0.2E3CAT TKCAT HLGOR E 04B3CAT —l [ i ] [ CJ -10uMRA 0.2E3CAT TKCAT I R suoumn ra -m -- f -- -- f -- -- f -- -- f -- -- -- ~-r 0 20000 40000 : 60000 80000 100000 120000 Relative CAT units B Fig 7 .
The E3 promoter is induced by RA via an RA response element .
( A ) The reporter activity of two constructs introduced into HL60 or HL6OR cells , ( RRE ) , -TKCAT in the presence or absence of 10 mol/L RA , is_d_is-played .
In each case , the mean of the CAT activity measured in four experiments , after normalization ( -394 to -373 mE3 ) ; -TKCAT [ J -10uM RA of the protein levels , is presented .
( B ) Reporter activity of p ( -394 to -373 mE3 ) , ; TKCAT , p ( RRE ) , TKCAT , ar ( Ge and pTKCAT introduced into HL60 or HL6OR cells , in TKCAT m Ra the presence or absence of 10 umol/L RA , is displayed .
In each case , the mean of the CAT activity 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 measured in four experiments , after normalization Relative CAT units The E3 transcript encodes a potentially phosphorylated protein with a high proportion of hydrophobic residues that are arranged in a series of five strongly hydrophobic domains , homologous to those found in polytopic transmembrane proteins . ``
'' Although we have yet to identify the subcellular location of the E3 protein , a model for its mem-brane-associated organization can be constructed based on the assumption that its five hydrophobic segments correspond to transmembrane domains .
This model would orientate the E3 protein such that the amino- and carboxy-termini and the potential N-myristylation sites would extend into the extracellular or luminal side of the membrane .
Four of the six potential serine phosphorylation sites would therefore be positioned on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane , with residues Serl13 and Serl53 being located within separate hydrophobic regions that may render these sites functionally inactive .
The suggestion that an immediate-early response gene encodes a membrane-spanning protein is not without precedent , as several transmembrane proteins have been identified as primary response sequences .
The growth arrest-specific Gas-3 transcript is negatively regulated in NIH-3T3 cells in an immediate-early response to serum exposure , and encodes a glycosylated protein that contains transmembrane domains with homology to the bovine NADH-ubiquinone oxydoreductase chain I . ``
'' Similarly , the mf transcript , which of the protein levels , is presented .
encodes a protein with homology to human tissue factor , a glycosylated transmembrane protein that initiates the blood clotting cascade after injury , `` `` was isolated as an immediate-early sequence that is transcriptionally upregulated in response to exposure to serum , fibroblast growth factor , and platelet-derived growth factor .
E3 transcripts were detected in the marrow , thymus , and spleen , and in myeloid , erythroid , and B-lymphoid cell-lines , suggesting its expression may be restricted to hematopoietic lineages .
Functional studies of the E3 promoter also suggest that E3 is preferentially transcribed in hematopoietic cells .
Luciferase-based constructs containing portions of the E3 promoter were introduced into the E3-positive K562 cell-line , and into the Colo320-DM and Jurkat cell-lines , where E3 transcripts are undetectable .
These reporter plasmids were significantly more active in K562 cells than in Colo320-DM and Jurkat cells , consistent with the distribution of the E3 transcript .
This tissue-specific transcription may be caused by the presence of multiple potential regulatory elements within the promoter that are frequently observed in the promoters of many genes expressed in hematopoietic cells , such as the DNA-binding motifs for the E2A , NFkB , SRF , GATA , AP2 , and ETS transcription factors .
The functional significance of these elements has not been examined to date , although it is tempting to speculate that their pres From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
HEMATOPOIETIC-SPECIFIC TARGET OF ence may direct the pattern of transcription observed in particular cell lineages .
For instance , it is possible that one or more GATA factors are responsible for the transcriptional downregulation of E3 observed during erythroid differentiation .
Removal of a segment of the E3 promoter that includes a GATA binding site results in a threefold increase in reporter activity , suggesting the presence of a negative regulatory element within this region .
The suggestion that GATA factors negatively regulate E3 transcription as erythroid cells undergo differentiation is also consistent with the observation that in vitro induction of erythroid differentiation in EML and MEL cells results in a significant reduction in E3 levels .
In promyelocytic MPRO cells , E3 transcription is regulated by RA in an immediate-early manner , with transcript levels increasing within 15 minutes ' exposure to RA , peaking after 60 minutes ' exposure , and returning to steady-state levels after several hours .
E3 levels also increase in HL60 cells following several days ' exposure to RA , suggesting a biphasic induction comprising separate primary and secondary phases .
Transfection analysis of the E3 promoter showed that the increase in E3 transcription after RA exposure is mediated by an RA response element present between nucleotides -394 and -378 .
Several features of this sequence initially suggested that it mediates the RA-inducibility of E3 transcription observed .
First , the nucleotide sequence gagt-gagttccaggaca is very similar to that of promoter elements shown to mediate the transcriptional regulation by steroid/ thyroid hormone family dimers , including the rat vitamin D response element , gggtgaatgaggaca , present within the osteocalcin gene , and the thyroid hormone response element , aggtgacaggaggaca , located within the rat myosin heavy chain a promoter . ``
Interestingly , each E3 half-site is also very similar to several candidate response elements isolated on the basis of in vivo binding to RARa dimers . ``
Secondly , the 5-base spacing between E3 RA response element half-sites has been shown to preferentially bind RAR homodimers and heterodimers . ``
Finally , the location of this element relative to the TATA box is consistent with that of many RA response elements characterized to date .
Transfection of the pO.4E3CAT reporter construct , which contains the RA response element , clearly demonstrated the RA-inducibility of this promoter in HL6O cells , with the reporter activity increasing 2.3-fold after exposure to RA .
Introduction of this construct into HL6OR cells , which lack functional RARa molecules , confirmed that the inducibility of E3 reporter activity observed in HL6O0 cells in response to RA is mediated by RARa .
Transfection of pO.2E3CAT into HL60 cells showed that removal of the region of the promoter that includes the putative RA response element abolishes the RA-induced increase in activity observed in HL6O0 cells with pO.4E3CAT .
Although removal of this region suggests the sequence between nucleotides -394 and -378 mediates the response to RA , it is possible that other sequences within the promoter are responsible for the inducibility .
For example , recent characterization of the regions flanking the HOXBI1 gene has identified two sequences with no homology to known RA response elements that are necessary for the RA-inducibility of HOXB1 .
'* ' `` These elements presum- 2527 ably mediate the response to RA by binding distinct transcriptional regulators that are themselves RA-inducible .
With this in mind , we have localized the RA response element to nucleotides -394 and -378 of the E3 promoter by transfection of p ( -394 to -373 mE3 ) ; TKCAT , which includes tandem repeats of a 17-bp region containing the putative RA response element cloned upstream of the minimal promoter construct , pTKCAT .
In HL60 cells cultured in the presence of stripped serum , this construct has a low level of reporter activity that is comparable to that of pTKCAT alone , which increases 2.4-fold after exposure to RA .
In comparison , the activity of p ( RRE ) , TKCAT , a reporter construct containing four repeats of the murine RAR RA response element , increases ninefold in response to RA .
Although the function of the E3 protein is unclear , it is anticipated that the identification of this gene will assist in elucidating the molecular processes involved in RA-induced granulocytic differentiation .
As it is an RARa target during normal development , E3 may also prove to be a useful tool for studying the cellular implications of the presence of abnormal RARa proteins during terminal myeloid differentiation .
It is currently unclear whether the PML/RARa hybrid protein acts as a positive or negative regulatory factor in leukemic blast cells present in acute promyelocytic leukemia cases .
Although PML/RARa has been shown to differ from RARa in its ability to regulate transcription of the AP ] gene , by acting as a transcriptional activator as opposed to a transcriptional repressor , `` transfection analysis of RA response elements in cells expressing PML/RARa suggests this protein can activate or repress transcription of particular target sequences .
`` * `` `` `` ' Therefore , we are currently exploring the regulation of E3 in promyelocytic leukemia cells expressing the PML/RARa protein .
ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors acknowledge Drs V. Seewaldt , G. Filippova , V. Loba-nenkov , and W. Hokanson for many helpful discussions .
We thank Dr S. Tsai for providing the MPRO BK/RF ( MPRO-B ) and MPRO-C cell lines .
REFERENCES 1 .
Mangelsdorf DJ , Evans RM : Retinoid receptors as transcription factors , in Yamamoto KR , McKnight S ( eds ) : Transcriptional Regulation .
Cold Spring Harbor , NY , Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , 1991 2 .
Mangelsdorf DJ , Ong ES , Dyck JA , Evans RM : A nuclear receptor that identifies a novel retinoic acid response pathway .
Nature 345:224 , 1990 3 .
Leroy P , Nakshatri H , Chambon P : Mouse retinoic acid receptor « 2 isoform is transcribed from a promoter that contains a retinoic acid response element .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:10138 , 1991 4. de The H , Vivanco-Ruiz M , Tiollais P , Stunnenberg H , Dejean A : Identification of a retinoic acid response element in the retinoic acid receptor 3 gene .
Nature 343:177 , 1990 5 .
Sucov HM , Murakami KK , Evans RM : Characterisation of an autoregulated response element in the mouse retinoic acid receptor type 3 gene .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87:5392 , 1990 6 .
Smith SM , Nakshatri H , Leroy P , Rees J , Chambon P : A retinoic acid response element is present in the mouse cellular retinol binding protein I ( mCRBPI ) promoter .
EMBO J 10:2223 , 1991 7 .
Durand B , Saunders M , Leroy P , Leid M , Chambon P : All From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
2528 trans and 9-cis retinoic acid induction of CRABPII transcription is mediated by RAR-RXR heterodimers bound by DR1 and DR2 repeated motifs .
Cell 71:73 , 1992 8 .
Mangelsdorf DJ , Umesono K , Kliewer SA , Borgmeyer U , Ong ES , Evans RM : A direct repeat in the cellular retinol-binding protein type II gene confers differential regulation by RXR and RAR .
Cell 66:555 , 1991 9 .
Langston AW , Gudas LJ : Identification of a retinoic acid responsive enhancer 3 ' of the murine homeobox gene HoxJ.6 .
Mech Dev 38:217 , 1992 10 .
Ogura T , Evans RM : A retinoic acid-triggered cascade of HOXBI gene activation .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92:387 , 1995 11 .
Ogura T , Evans RM : Evidence for two distinct retinoic acid response pathways for HOXBI gene regulation .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92:392 , 1995 12 .
Studer M , Popperl H , Marshall H , Kuroiwa A , Krumlauf R : Role of a conserved retinoic acid response element in rhombomere restriction of Hoxb-1 .
Science 265:1728 , 1994 13 .
Suva LJ , Towler DA , Harada S , Gaub MP , Rodan GA : Characterization of retinoic acid- and cell-dependent sequences which regulate zif268 gene expression in osteoblastic cells .
Mol Endocrinol 8:1507 , 1994 14 .
Forman BM , Casanova J , Raaka BM , Ghysdael J , Samuels HH : Half-site spacing and orientation determines whether thyroid hormone and retinoic acid receptors and related factors bind to DNA response elements as monomers , homodimers or heterodimers .
Mol Endocrinol 6:429 , 1992 15 .
Nagpal S , Saunders M , Kastner P , Durand B , Nakshatri H , Chambon P : Promoter context- and response element-dependent specificity of the transcriptional activation and modulating functions of retinoic acid receptors .
Cell 70:1007 , 1992 16 .
Breitman TR , Selonick S , Collins SJ ; Induction of differentiation of the human promyelocytic leukemia cell line ( HL60 ) by retinoic acid .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 77:2936 , 1980 17 .
Collins SJ , Robertson KA , Mueller L : Retinoic acid-induced granulocytic differentiation of HL60 myeloid leukemia cells is mediated directly through the retinoic acid receptor ( RAR-a ) .
Mol Cell Biol 10:2154 , 1990 18 .
Robertson KA , Emami B , Collins SJ : Retinoic acid-resistant HL6GOR cells harbor a point mutation in the retinoic acid receptor ligand-binding domain that confers dominant negative activity .
Blood 80:1885 , 1992 19 .
Tsai S , Bartelmez S , Heyman R , Damm K , Evans R , Collins SJ ; A mutated retinoic acid receptor- exhibiting dominant-negative activity alters the lineage development of a multipotent hematopoietic cell line .
Genes Dev 6:2258 , 1992 20 .
Tsai S , Collins SJ : A dominant negative retinoic acid receptor blocks neutrophil differentiation at the promyelocyte stage .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90:7153 , 1993 21 .
Chomienne C , Ballerini P , Balitrand N , Daniel M , Fenaux P , Castaigne S , Degos L : All-trans retinoic acid in acute promyelocytic leukemias .
II .
In vitro studies : Structure-function relationship .
Blood 76:1710 , 1990 22 .
Castaigne S , Chomienne C , Daniel MT , Ballerini P , Berger R , Fenaux P , Degos L ; All-trans retinoic acid in acute promyelocytic leukemias .
I .
Clinical results .
Blood 76:1704 , 1990 23 .
Huang ME , Ye YC , Chen SR , Chai JR , Lu JX , Zhoa L , Gu HT , Wang ZY : Use of all-trans retinoic acid in the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia .
Blood 72:567 , 1988 24 .
Alcalay M , Zangrilli D , Pandolfi PP , Longo L , Mencarelli A , Giacommucci A , Rocchi M , Biondi A , Rambaldi A , Lo Coco F , Diverio D , Donti E , Grignani F , Pelicci PG : Translocation breakpoint of acute promyelocytic leukemia lies within the retinoic acid receptor a locus .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:1977 , 1991 25 .
Barrow J , Goddard AD , Sheer D , Solomon E : Molecular SCOTT , MUELLER , AND COLLINS analysis of acute promyelocytic leukemia breakpoint cluster region on chromosome 17 .
Science 249:1577 , 1990 26 .
Chen Z , Brand NJ , Chen A , Chen SJ , Tong JH , Wang ZY , Waxman J , Zelent A : Fusion between a novel Kruppel-like zinc finger gene and the retinoic acid receptor a locus due to a variant t ( 11 ; 17 ) translocation associated with acute promyelocytic leukae-mia .
EMBO J 12:1161 , 1993 27. de The H , Chomienne C , Lanotte M , Degos L , Dejean A : The t ( 15 ; 17 ) translocation of acute promyelocytic leukemia fuses the retinoic acid receptor a gene to a novel transcribed locus .
Nature 347:558 , 1990 28. de The H , Lavau C , Marchio A , Chomienne C , Degos L , Dejean A : The PML-RARa fusion mRNA generated by the t ( 15 ; 17 ) translocation in acute promyelocytic leukemia encodes a functionally altered RAR .
Cell 66:675 , 1991 29 .
Kakizuka A , Millet WH , Umesono K , Warnell RP , Frankel SR , Murty VVVS , Dmitrovsky E , Evans R : Chromosomal translocation t ( 15 ; 17 ) in human acute promyelocytic leukemia fuses RARa with a novel transcription factor , PML .
Cell 66:663 , 1991 30 .
Kastner P , Perez A , Lutz Y , Rochette-Egly C , Gaub MP , Durand B , Lanotte M , Berger R , Chambon P : Structure , localization and transcriptional properties of two classes of retinoic acid receptor a fusion proteins in acute promyelocytic leukemia ( APL ) : Structural similarities with a new family of oncoproteins .
EMBO J 11:629 , 1992 31 .
Pandolfi PP , Grignani F , Alcalay M , Mencarelli A , Biondi A , Lo Coco F , Grignani F , Pelicci PG : Structure and origin of the acute promyelocytic leukemia myl/RARa cDNA and characterisation of its retinoid binding and transactivation properties .
Oncogene 6:1285 , 1991 32 .
Goddard AD , Barrow J , Freemont PS , Solomon E : Characterization of a zinc finger gene disrupted by the t ( 15 ; 17 ) in acute promyelocytic leukemia .
Science 254:1371 , 1991 33 .
Mu ZM , Chin KV , Liu JH , Lozano G , Chang KS : PML , a growth suppressor disrupted in acute promyelocytic leukemia .
Mol Cell Biol 14:6858 , 1994 34 .
Chirgwin JM , Przybyla AA , MacDonald RJ , Rutter WJ : Isolation of biologically active ribonucleic acid from sources enriched in ribonuclease .
Biochemistry 18:5294 , 1979 35 .
Altshul SF , Gish W , Miller W , Myers EW , Lipman DJ : Basic local alignment search tool .
J Mol Biol 215:403 , 1990 36 .
Nuchprayoon I , Meyers S , Scott LM , Suzow J , Hiebert S , Friedman AD : PEBP2/CBF , the murine homolog of the human myeloid AML1 and proto-oncogenes , regulates the murine myeloperoxidase and neutrophil elastase genes in immature myeloid cells .
Mol Cell Biol 14:5558 , 1994 37. van Zonneveld AJ , Curriden S $ , Loskutoff DJ : Type I plasmin-ogen activator inhibitor gene : Functional analysis and glucocorticoid regulation of its promoter .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 85:5525 , 1988 38 .
Suzow J , Friedman AD : The murine myeloperoxidase promoter contains several functional elements , one of which binds a cell type-restricted transcription factor , myeloid nuclear factor 1 ( MyNF1 ) .
Mol Cell Biol 13:2141 , 1993 39 .
Ishida S , Shudo K , Takada S , Koike K : ; Transcription from the P2 promoter of human proto-oncogene myc is suppressed by retinoic acid through an interaction between the E2F element and its binding proteins .
Cell Growth Diff 5:287 , 1994 40 .
Kozak M : Downstream secondary structure facilitates recognition of initiator codons by eukaryotic ribosomes .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87:8301 , 1990 41 .
Kishimoto A , Nishiyama K , Nakanishi H , Uratsuji Y , Nomura Y , Takeyama Y , Nishizuka Y : Studies on the phosphorylation of myelin basic protein by protein kinase C and adenosine 3',5'-mono-phosphate-dependent protein kinase .
J Biol Chem 260:2492 , 1985 42 .
Woodgett JR , Gould KL , Hunter T : Substrate specificity of From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
HEMATOPOIETIC-SPECIFIC TARGET OF RAR protein kinase C. Use of synthetic peptides corresponding to physiological sites as probes for substrate recognition requirements .
Eur J Biochem 161:177 , 1986 43 .
Pinna LA : Casein kinase 2 : An 'eminence grise ' in cellular regulation ?
Biochim Biophys Acta 1054:267 , 1990 44 .
Grand RJA : Acylation of viral and eukaryotic proteins .
Biochem J 258:625 , 1989 45 .
Towler DA , Gordon JI , Adams SP , Glaser L : The biology and enzymology of eukaryotic protein acylation .
Annu Rev Biochem 57:69 , 1988 46 .
Caput D , Beutler B , Hartog K , Thayer R , Brown-Shimer S , Cerami A : Identification of a common nucleotide sequence in the 3'-untranslated region of mRNA molecules specifying inflammatory mediators .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 83:1670 , 1986 47 .
Chen C , Shyu A : Selective degradation of early-response gene mRNAs : Functional analyses of sequence features of the AU-rich elements .
Mol Cell Biol 14:8471 , 1994 48 .
Shaw G , Kamen R : A conserved AU sequence from the 3 ' untranslated region of GM-CSF mediates selective mRNA degrada-tion .
Cell 46:659 , 1986 49 .
Sheets MD , Ogg SC , Wickens MP : Point mutations in AAU-AAA and the poly ( A ) addition site : Effects on the accuracy and efficiency of cleavage and polyadenylation in vitro .
Nucleic Acids Res 13:1905 , 1990 f 50 .
Pereira MEA , Mejia JS , Ortega-Barria E , Matzilevich D , Pri-oli RP : The Trypanosoma cruzi neuraminidase contains sequences similar to bacterial neuraminidases , YWTD repeats of the low density lipoprotein receptor , and type III modules of fibronectin .
J Exp Med 174:179 , 1991 51 .
Tsai S , Bartelmez S , Sitnicka E , Collins SJ : Lymphohemato-poietic progenitors immortalized by a retroviral vector harboring a dominant negative retinoic acid receptor can recapitulate lymphoid myeloid , and erythroid development .
Genes Dev 8:2831 , 1994 52 .
Murre C , McCaw PS , Baltimore D : A new DNA binding and dimerisation motif in immunoglobin enhancer binding daughterless , MyoD and mye proteins .
Cell 56:777 , 1989 53 .
Ho IC , Yang LH , Molle G , Leiden JM : A T-cell-specific transcriptional enhancer element 3 ' of C a in the human T-cell receptor a locus .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86:6714 , 1989 54 .
Williams T , Tjian R : Analysis of the DNA-binding and activation properties of the human transcription factor AP-2 .
Genes Dev 5:670 , 1991 55 .
Fujita T , Shibuya H , Hotta H , Yamanishi K , Tanaguchi T : gene regulation : Tandemly repeated sequences of a synthetic 6 bp oligomer function as a virus-inducible enhancer .
Cell 49:357 , 1987 56 .
Miyamoto M , Fujita T , Kimura Y , Maruyama M , Harada H , Sudo Y , Miyata T , Taniguchi T : Regulated expression of a gene encoding a nuclear factor , IRF-1 , that specifically binds to IFN-8 gene regulatory elements .
Cell 54:903 , 1988 57 .
Martin DI , Orkin SH : Transcriptional activation and DNA binding by the erythroid factor GF-1/NF-El/Eryf 1 .
Genes Dev 4:1886 , 1990 58 .
Meyers S , Downing JR , Hiebert SW : Identification of AML1 and the ( 8 ; 21 ) translocation protein ( AML-1/ETO ) as sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins : The runt homology domain is required for DNA binding and protein-protein interactions .
Mol Cell Biol 13:6336 , 1993 59 .
Kunsch C , Ruben SM , Rosen CA : Selection of optimal Rel DNA binding motifs : Interaction of both subunits of with DNA is required for transcriptional activation .
Mol Cell Biol 12:4412 , 1992 60 .
Nolan GP , Ghosh S , Liou HC , Tempst P , Baltimore D : DNA binding and Ix } inhibition of the cloned p65 subunit of NF-kappa B , a rel-related polypeptide .
Cell 64:961 , 1991 2529 61 .
Norman C , Runswick M , Pollock R , Treisman R : Isolation and properties of cDNA clones encoding SRF , a transcription factor that binds to the c-fos serum response element .
Cell 55:989 , 1988 62 .
Vasios GW , Gold JD , Petkovich M , Chambon P , Gudas LJ : A retinoic acid-responsive element is present in the 5 ' flanking region of the laminin B1 gene .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86:9099 , 1989 63 .
Astigianos S , Barkai U , Abarzua P , Tan SC , Harper MI , Sherman MI : Changes in gene expression following exposure to nulli-SCCI murine embryonal carcinoma cells to inducers of differ-entiation : Characterization of a down-regulated mRNA .
Differentiation 46:61 , 1991 64 .
Fraij BM , Birckbichler PJ , Patterson MK , Lee KN , Gonzales RA : A retinoic acid-inducible mRNA from human erythroleukemia cells encodes a novel tissue transglutaminase homologue .
J Biol Chem 267:22616 , 1992 65 .
Hosler BA , LaRosa GJ , Grippo JF , Gudas LJ : Expression of REX-1 , a gene containing zinc finger motifs , is rapidly reduced by retinoic acid in F9 teratocarcinoma cells .
Mol Cell Biol 9:5623 , 1989 66 .
LaRosa GJ , Gudas LJ : An early effect of retinoic acid : Cloning of an mRNA ( Era-1 ) exhibiting rapid and protein synthesis-independent induction during teratocarcinoma stem cell differentiation .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 85:329 , 1988 67 .
Levine RA , LaRosa GJ , Gudas LJ : Isolation of cDNA clones for genes exhibiting reduced expression after differentiation of murine teratocarcinoma stem cells .
Mol Cell Biol 4:2142 , 1984 68 .
Smits HL , Floyd EE , Jetten AM : Molecular cloning of gene sequences regulated during squamous differentiation of tracheal epithelial cells and controlled by retinoic acid .
Mol Cell Biol 7:4017 , 1987 69 .
Bhatti L , Sidell N : Transcriptional regulation by retinoic acid of interleukin-2 a receptors in human B cells .
Immunology 81:273 , 1994 70 .
Burn TC , Petrovick MS , Hohaus S , Rollins BJ , Tenen DG : Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 gene is expressed in activated neutrophils and retinoic acid-induced human myeloid cell lines .
Blood 84:2776 , 1994 71 .
Drach J , Zhao S , Malavasi F , Mehta K : Rapid induction of CD38 antigen on myeloid leukemia cells by all-trans retinoic acid .
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 195:545 , 1993 72 .
Hickstein D , Back A , Collins S : Regulation of expression of the CD11b and CD18 subunits of the neutrophil adherence receptor during human myeloid differentiation .
J Biol Chem 264:21812 , 1988 73 .
Oberg F , Botling J , Nilsson K : Functional antagonism between vitamin D3 and retinoic acid in the regulation of CD14 and CD23 expression during monocytic differentiation of U-937 cells .
J Immunol 150:3487 , 1993 74 .
Agura ED , Howard M , Collins SJ : Identification and sequence analysis of the promoter for the leukocyte integrin 3-subunit ( CD18 ) : A retinoic acid-inducible gene .
Blood 79:602 , 1992 75 .
Pahl HL , Rosmarin AG , Tenen DG : Characterization of the myeloid-specific CD11b promoter .
Blood 79:865 , 1992 76 .
Singer SJ : The structure and insertion of integral proteins in membranes .
Annu Rev Cell Biol 6:247 , 1990 77 .
Manfioletti G , Ruaro ME , Del Sal G , Philipson L , Schneider C : A growth arrest-specific ( gas ) gene codes for a membrane protein .
Mol Cell Biol 10:2924 , 1990 78 .
Hartzell S , Ryder K , Lanahan A , Lau LF , Nathans D : A growth factor-responsive gene of murine BALB/c 373 cells encodes a protein homologous to human tissue factor .
Mol Cell Biol 9:2567 , 1989 79 .
Demay MB , Gerardi JM , DeLuca HF , Kronenburg HM : DNA sequences in the rat osteocalcin gene that bind the 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D ; receptor and confer responsiveness to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D ; .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87:369 , 1990 80 .
Izum S , Mahdavi V : Thyroid hormone receptor a isoforms From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
2530 generated by alternative splicing differentially activate myosin heavy chain gene expression .
Nature 334:539 , 1988 81 .
Noda M , Vogel RL , Craig AM , Prahl J , DeLuca HF , Denhardt DT : Identification of a DNA sequence responsible for binding of the 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D ; , receptor and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D ; , enhancement of mouse secreted phosphoprotein 1 ( Spp-1 or os-teocalcin } gene expression .
Proc Natl Acad Sei USA §7:9995 , 1990 SCOTT , MUELLER , AND COLLINS 82 .
Costa-Giomi MP , Gaub MP , Chambon P , Abarzua P : Characterization of a retinoic acid response element isolated by whole genome PCR .
Nucleic Acids Res 20:3223 , 1992 83 .
Doucas SV , Brockes JP , Yaniv M , de The H , Dejean A : The PML-retinoic acid receptor a translocation converts the receptor from an inhibitor to a retinoic acid-dependent activator of transcription factor AP-1 .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90:9345 , 1993 From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
® blO 0d 1996 88 : 2517-2530 E3 , a hematopoietic-specific transcript directly regulated by the retinoic acid receptor alpha LM Scott , L Mueller and SJ Collins 4 _ 5 , ' _ > , # 04 ; ©1004 @ 207 Updated information and services can be found at : http : //www.bloodjournal.org/content/88/7/2517.full.html Articles on similar topics can be found in the following Blood collections Information about reproducing this article in parts or in its entirety may be found online at : requests Information about ordering reprints may be found online at : http : //www.bloodjournal.org/site/misc/rights.xhtml # reprints Information about subscriptions and ASH membership may be found online at : http : //www.bloodjournal.org/site/subscriptions/index.xhtml Blood ( print ISSN 0006-4971 , online ISSN 1528-0020 ) , is published weekly by the American Society of Hematology , 2021 L St , NW , Suite 900 , Washington DC 20036 .
Copyright 2011 by The American Society of Hematology ; all rights reserved .
