Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA Vol .
93 , pp .
12267-12271 , October 1996 Biochemistry Silencing of human fetal globin expression is impaired in the absence of the adult -globin gene activator protein EKLF ANDREW C. PERKINS* , KARIN M. L. GAENSLERT , AND STUART H. Or « kin*t $ § *Department of Hematology , The Children 's Hospital and Department of Pediatrics , Harvard Medical School , and *Howard Hughes Medical Institute , P ( 3 ) P P 8 Boston , MA 02115 ; and 1 `` Department of Medicine , University of California , San Francisco , CA 94143-0724 Contributed by Stuart H. Orkin , August 13 , 1996 ABSTRACT Globin genes are subject to tissue-specific and developmental stage-specific regulation .
A switch from human fetal ( y ) - to adult ( B ) -globin expression occurs within erythroid precursor cells of the adult lineage .
Previously we and others showed by targeted gene disruption that the zinc finger gene , erythroid Kriippel-like factor ( EKLF ) , is required for expression of the B-globin gene in mice , presumably through interaction with a high-affinity binding site in the proximal promoter .
To examine the role of EKLF in the developmental regulation of the human y-globin gene we interbred EKLF heterozygotes ( +/- ) with mice harboring a human -globin yeast artificial chromosome transgene .
We find that in the absence of EKLF , while human -globin expression is dramatically reduced , y-globin transcripts are elevated ~5-fold .
Impaired silencing of y-globin expression identifies EKLF as the first transcription factor participating quantitatively in the y-globin to -globin switch .
Our findings are compatible with a competitive model of switching in which EKLF mediates an adult stage-specific interaction between the -globin gene promoter and the locus control region that excludes the y-globin gene .
Vertebrate globins are encoded by small « -like and B-like gene families .
The expression of individual members is programmed such that different hemoglobin tetramers are assembled within red cells at different developmental stages .
The human B-globin cluster spans > 60 kb on chromosome 11 and contains an embryonic gene ( e ) , duplicated fetal genes ( Ay and Gy ) , and one minor ( 8 ) and one major ( B ) adult gene .
The murine fB-cluster , which is similarly organized , contains embryonic ( & , Bho , and Bh ; and adult ( Bm ; and Buia ) expressed genes , but no fetal stage-specific gene .
Rather , the murine Bho and Bh ; globin genes , which most closely resemble the human y-globin gene , are expressed only in yolk sac-derived embryonic red cells .
An upstream , distal regulatory element , known as the locus control region ( LCR ) , is required for position-independent , copy number-dependent , high level expression of linked globin genes in mice ( 1 ) .
The mechanisms by which individual globin genes within the loci are developmentally regulated remains incompletely understood , but has been postulated to involve interaction of stage-specific transcrip-tional regulators with critical stage-specific cis-elements .
The participation of cis-elements in the switching from human y- to B-globin has been studied most extensively in the mouse by analyzing the expression profiles of transgenes containing various combinations of globin gene promoter and LCR regions .
From these ( reviewed in ref .
2 ) and complementary transfection experiments in chicken erythroid cells ( 3 ) , two mechanisms of globin gene switching have been proposed .
One model posits that individual globin genes are regulated autonomously ; that is , their expression is regulated independently of the presence of linked globin genes .
The The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge payment .
This article must therefore be hereby marked `` advertisement `` in accordance with 18 U.S.C .
§1734 solely to indicate this fact .
12267 other suggests that developmental regulation reflects the competition of globin genes for the influence of the LCR ( reviewed in ref .
2 ) .
According to this model , which is based on the enhancer competition model for the s- to B-globin switch in chickens ( 3 ) , the LCR might loop to each gene in a mutually exclusive fashion .
Short promoter regions of individual human globin genes contain sufficient information to direct erythroid- and developmental stage-specific expression in transgenic mice ( 4 , 5 ) .
In addition , y-globin transgenes linked to LCR elements are substantially silenced in the mouse fetal liver ( 6 ) .
These observations are consistent with autonomous modes of regulation .
On the other hand , many transgenes containing the LCR linked to a single globin gene are inappropriately regulated ( 7 , 8 ) .
Expression is seen at both embryonic and adult stages , a finding consistent with loss of stage-specific competition from a linked second gene .
Furthermore , appropriate stage-specific expression is observed when the y- and B-globin genes are linked in cis and are in their proper orientation with respect to the LCR ( 9 ) .
These experiments support competitive regula-tion , particularly with respect to silencing of the B-globin gene at the embryonic stage .
The role , if any , played by the -globin gene in competitive silencing of the y-globin gene at the fetal liver stage of development remains uncertain .
The use of small transgenes that do not reflect the normal organization of the -globin cluster complicates interpretation of many transgenic experiments .
Large DNA constructs derived from yeast artificial chromosomes ( YACs ) , however , more accurately mimic the behavior of complex multigene loci , such as the -globin locus .
Mice harboring a single copy of the entire human B-globin locus , as a YAC encompassing 150 kb ( 10 ) or 248 kb ( 11 ) of DNA , express each of the globin genes at levels comparable to the equivalent endogenous mouse genes and in a proper developmental profile .
These mice provide the most appropriate murine model for studying the human y- to B-globin gene switch .
Despite advances in mapping the cis-elements that participate in switching , the nuclear regulatory factors influencing the y- to B-globin switch have remained elusive .
Despite the attraction of models in which stage-specific activators or repressors control the developmental profile of globin gene expression , no stage-specific proteins have been identified .
A region in the proximal promoter of the y-globin gene ( the stage-selector element ) has been reported to bind a nuclear factor complex , the stage-selector protein ( 12 ) .
While the stage-selector protein complex is proposed to be a positive regulator of the y-globin promoter , one of its subunits is a Abbreviations : EKLF , erythroid Kriippel-like factor ; LCR , locus control region ; YAC , yeast artificial chromosome ; CFU-E , colony forming unit-erythroid ; RT-PCR , reverse transcriptase-PCR ; E , em bryonic day .
$ To whom reprint requests should be addressed at : Division of Hematology , Children 's Hospital , Howard Hughes Medical Institute , 300 Longwood Avenue , Boston , MA 02115. e-mail : Orkin @ rascal .
med.harvard.edu .
12268 - Biochemistry : Perkins et al .
ubiquitously expressed polypeptide , CP2 ( 13 ) .
Whether the apparent stage-specificity of stage-selector protein binding reflects a stage-specific component in the complex , or modification of subunits that are not themselves developmentally controlled , is currently unknown .
The expression of the adult B-globin gene is exquisitely dependent on a transcription factor known as erythroid Kriippel-like factor ( EKLF ) , first identified as an erythroid-enriched cDNA by substractive hybridization ( 14 ) .
The deduced EKLF consensus DNA-binding site ( CCNCNCCCN ; ref .
15 ) matches that found in the -globin promoter .
Accordingly , EKLF transactivates reporter constructs containing the B-globin CACC-boxes , but fails to bind to mutated sequences seen in patients with B-thalassemia ( 15 ) .
An essential , nonre-dundant role for EKLF in murine -globin expression was established by study of EKLF null ( EKLF-~ ) embryos generated by gene targeting of embryonic stem cells ( 16 , 17 ) .
Here we address the role EKLF may play in the regulation of y-globin expression , particularly its silencing in the adult erythroid lineage .
We previously proposed a possible role for EKLF during the y-globin to -globin switch ( 16 ) on the basis of the selective -globin deficiency we observed in EKLF-'~-mice and elevated fetal hemoglobin in human adults heterozygous for deletions of the B-globin promoter or for mutations in the CACC box of the B-globin promoter ( 16-19 ) .
By studying the expression profile of a human globin YAC transgene in EKLF-~- embryos , we demonstrate that EKLF is essential not only for expression of the human B-globin gene , but also for proper silencing of the human y-globin gene .
These findings suggest that EKLF may participate in the interactions of the B-globin promoter with the LCR that contributes to y-globin silencing by a competitive mechanism .
As such , they establish EKLF as the first transcription factor affecting the y-globin to B-globin switch .
MATERIALS AND METHODS Generation of EKLF-~'~ Embryos Containing the Entire Human B-Globin Locus .
EKLF*/'~ mice ( 16 ) were bred with mice harboring a 150-kb B-globin locus YAC ( line A20.1 ) ( 10 ) .
EKLF *~ offspring were identified by Southern blot analysis as described ( 16 ) , and the presence of the B-YAC transgené was determined by hybridization with a 1.9-kb KprI-Pvull human HS-2 probe derived from pUC19-HSII ( 1.9 ) $ ( 20 ) .
EKLF*'~- , B-YAC animals were interbred and staged litters were killed to examine embryonic [ embryonic day ( E ) 10-E11 ] and definitive ( E12-E15 ) hematopoiesis .
Hematopoietic Cell Culture and Immunofluorescence As-says .
Single cell suspensions of fetal liver cells and yolk sac-derived defective progenitor cells were prepared as described ( 21 ) .
Colony-forming units-erythroid ( CFU-E ) were scored after 2 days growth in methylcellulose cultures supplemented with 2 units/ml erythropoietin .
Liquid erythroid cultures were initiated with 1 X 10° fetal liver cells per ml and performed in DMEM/20 % fetal bovine serum containing recombinant kit ligand ( 50 ng/ml ) and erythropoietin ( 2 units/ml ) .
After 7 days , the cellular composition was examined by May-Grunwald Giemsa staining of cytocentrifuge specimens .
Immunofluorescence for y-globin was performed as described ( 21 ) .
Fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated monoclonal antibodies from four independent hybridomas generated from rats immunized with purified human hemoglobin F , a kind gift from Dr. Thomas Campbell ( Isolabs ) , were tested for specificity and low background on nontransgenic murine erythroid cells .
One monoclonal antibody ( 9C3 ) was used for these studies .
RNase Protection and reverse transcriptase-PCR ( RT-PCR ) Analyses .
RNA was prepared from primary tissues and in vitro cultured cells as described ( 22 ) , and RNase protection assays were performed as described ( 23 ) .
Mouse a- and Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 93 ( 1996 ) { -globin and human y- and B-globin probes were previously reported ( 23 ) .
A human B-globin genomic PCR product including 5 untranslated and first exon sequences was cloned into the BamHI and EcoRI sites of pBSII-SK~ ( Stratagene ) .
The human -globin riboprobe , transcribed with T3 RNA polymerase from a EcoRI linearized template , protects the first 90 bp of human B-globin mRNA from RNase digestion .
cDNA was prepared from single CFU-E as described ( 21 ) .
Semiquantitative RT-PCR for globin transcripts was performed with primer pairs corresponding to a unique 5 ' untranslated region of each globin gene transcript and a conserved region spanning exons 2 and 3 .
In this manner , amplification of any contaminating DNA was avoided , and specificity was confirmed by failure to amplify human globin PCR products from cDNA derived from nontransgenic erythroid cells .
The mouse a-globin primer pairs were TCTGA-CAGACTCAGGAAGAAA and GTGGCTCAGGAGACGG-GATCCACA .
One of the human y-globin primer pairs ( AATAAGCTCCTAGTCCAGACGC ) was specific for the 5 ' untranslated region of the duplicated human Ay and Gy transcripts .
The other 7IGAAGTTCTC ) was degenerate for sequences bridging the boundaries of exons 2-3 of all mouse and human B-like globins genes .
Semiquantitative RT-PCR was performed in the presence of [ P2P as described ( 24 ) .
Each amplification cycle was performed at 94°C for 1 min , 62°C for 1 min , and 72°C for 1 min .
Since the quantity of human y-globin transcripts was less than murine a-globin transcripts , PCR was performed in the presence of the human y-globin primer pairs for four cycles before the addition of the a-globin primer pairs .
The number of cycles required to amplify both PCR products within the linear range was determined empirically for each cDNA sample .
RESULTS EKLEF Is Required for Expression of the Human B-Globin Gene .
Our prior evidence suggested that EKLF -- embryos die from B-thalassemia , a hemolytic disorder due to decreased f-globin production and resulting unbalanced a-globin synthesis ( 16 ) .
We first tested by interbreeding of EKLF*'~ and B-YAC transgenic mice whether the presence of the human B-YAC in an EKLF-'- background would rescue this embryonic lethality .
No rescue was observed , as none of 38 B-YAC t+ newborn animals from EKLF*~ ( B-YAC* ) crosses were of the EKLF-'- genotype .
Analysis of timed litters demonstrated that B-YACt+ , EKLF -- embryos succumb to anemia at E15 and are not appreciably different in appearance from B-YAC- , EKLF-'~ littermates .
Despite the failure to rescue EKLF~-embryos ( see Discussion ) , human globin gene expression could be examined in E15 fetal livers .
Human -globin transcripts were profoundly reduced in EKLF-~- embryos at E15 compared with EKLF*/~ littermates ( Fig .
1a ) .
The deficit in human -globin gene expression is even more pronounced than previously observed for the endogenous mouse -globin gene ( 16 , 17 ) .
Indeed , the human B-globin gene appears inactive in EKLF-~'- embryos .
Elevated y-Globin Gene Expression in EKLF -- Fetal Liver Cells .
We next examined the ratio of human y-globin/mouse a-globin transcripts in fetal liver samples of varying genotypes .
As shown in Fig .
1 b and c , y-globin transcripts , which at E15 are present at only 1-2 % the level of mouse a-RNA in EKLF*'~ samples , are elevated ~S5-fold in the absence of EKLF .
Thus , it would appear that EKLF , and presumably $ B-globin transcription , is required for proper y-gene silencing .
Several potential problems complicate simple interpretation of these data .
First , it remained possible that embryonic red cell contamination of EKLF~~ fetal liver preparations might lead to a spurious increase in y-globin transcripts , since the y-gene is actively expressed at the embryonic stage in the Biochemistry : Perkins et al .
a litter A z U U U U U E < + +P r r r r EKLF mu ( - » hu f - » ( 0 _ hu ¥ - » mu ( t - » © human y/ murine a ratio ( % ) n » -- a- e Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 93 ( 1996 ) - 12269 fol d 8 ; lﬂwlyl a T_ R p EKLF a_ C Uo « - _ mu C QR < - mu a w ® §§+t++ |3YAC = % * % % Gj \ EKLF C f o < _ , ++++++ ﬁYAC 8 §w\\ ' i-\\ ' C 3 I T TI T T T EKLEF +- Au T cuits emai apes - ... Hih +- mu a Fig .
1 .
Persistent y-globin expression in EKLF-'~ fetal liver erythroid cells .
( a-4 ) RNase protection analyses for human B-globin relative to mouse a-globin ( a ) , human y-globin relative to mouse a-globin ( b and c ) , and mouse £ ( embryonic ) globin relative to mouse a-globin ( d ) transcripts in E15 fetal liver RNA samples .
Undigested probes and tRNA controls were loaded in lanes 1 and 2 .
Total RNA ( 500 ng ) was loaded in the remaining lanes .
RNA from E11 embryonic red cells was loaded in the far right hand lane of d as a positive control for { -globin transcripts .
The EKLF genotype and presence of the B-YAC transgene , as determined by Southern blot analysis , is indicated above each lane .
( c ) A graphic representation of the PhosphorImager-analyzed data from b .
A correction to account for the 10-fold greater specific activity of the himan globin riboprobes with respect to the mouse « -globin riboprobe has been incorporated into the calculated ratios of globin transcripts .
( e and f ) RNase protection assays for human y-globin and mouse a-globin transcripts in erythroid cells derived from bulk culture of E13 fetal liver cells ( e ) or pools of 10-20 individually isolated BFU -e from E11 yolk sac-derived definitive progenitor cells ( f ) .
mouse ( but not the human ) ( 4 , 25 ) .
To exclude this possibility , we assayed mouse embryonic { -globin in the same samples .
As shown in Fig .
1d , { -globin expression was not detected in fetal liver preparations at E15 .
To confirm that elevated y-globin levels resulted from the absence of EKLF in definitive erythroid cells , we also expanded cells from definitive E13 fetal liver progenitors in vitro with kit ligand and erythropoietin .
Embryonic cells , if present at this stage , fail to divide , and are rapidly lost upon culture .
Human y-globin transcripts were ~5-fold more abundant in EKLF-'- versus EKLF*/~ cell cultures , as compared with mouse a-globin ( Fig .
le ) .
Thus , contamination with embryonic cells expressing the y-globin gene fails to account for the increased y/a ratio in EKLF-'- , B-YAC* erythroid cells .
Elevated y-Globin Gene Expression Is Not Secondary to Anemic Stress .
We also considered the possibility that anemic stress in EKLF-'~- embryos might contribute to impaired y-globin silencing , since acute erythropoietic stress in adult humans transiently reactivates low levels of y-globin gene expression ( reviewed in refs .
26 and 27 ) .
To address this possibility , adult erythroid colonies were expanded from the yolk sacs of E11 EKLF-'- mice and their littermates ( 28 ) .
At this stage , EKLF-'~- embryos are not anemic and can not be distinguished by inspection from EKLF*/'~ littermates ( 16 ) .
y-Globin transcripts were examined from pools of 10-20 individual colonies .
As shown in Fig .
If , y-globin transcripts were elevated only in the absence of EKLF ( Fig .
1f , lane 8 ) .
Thus , increased y-globin expression is a direct consequence of 12270 - Biochemistry : Perkins et al .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 93 ( 1996 ) a 1 2 3 b ae laze fs ] -- AU Y = -- a wee ® - -my o -- 8 2 = wt CFU-e 8 2 = EKLF -/- CFU-e O 30 30 E g a g 9 25+ -= £ z. x 5 20+ ~ & € : l - & `` a § ° `` I 5 9 II $ % & s !
I so , 2 3 a & a 7 8 9 10 +4 12 I 4 : - M 3 q a 5 a 7 a o 10 G1 42 13 44 Fig .
2 .
Most EKLF-'~- fetal liver-derived erythroid colonies are reprogrammed to y-globin gene expression .
RNA derived from individual CFU-E from fetal liver cells harvested at E13 was subjected to RT-PCR analysis with primers specific for murine a- and human y-globin transcripts .
PCR products in the linear range of amplification from three representative ( a ) and EKLF -- ( b ) CFU-E are shown .
The expected sizes of the human y- and mouse a-globin PCR products are indicated by arrows .
The triangles represent increasing PCR cycles ( two further cycles per lane ) .
Below each autoradiograph is a graphical representation of the quantitated ratios of human y- to mouse « -globin PCR products derived from analysis of 12 EKLF*/~ and 14 EKLF-'~- CFU-E .
Results have been arranged in ascending order of y-globin expression levels .
the absence of EKLF rather than a consequence of anemic stress .
EKLF-~- Erythroid Progenitor Cells Have an Increased Probability of Executing a y-Globin Expression Program .
To examine the role of EKLF in the establishment of the globin gene expression program at the time the y-globin to -globin gene switch is in progress , individual erythroid colonies derived from E13 fetal liver cells ( CFU-E ) were subjected to reverse RT-PCR analysis to quantitate the ratio of human y/mouse a-globin transcripts ( Fig .
2 ) .
In 14 of 15 EKLF-'- and 12 of 15 EKLF*'~ colonies , RNA of adequate integrity was recovered as evidenced by the presence of detectable -globin transcripts .
Semiquantitative PCR simultaneously performed in the linear range for murine & - and human y-globin transcripts ( see Materials and Methods ) revealed that all 14 EKLF-'- colonies expressed y-globin at > 10 % of mouse -globin levels ( overall range , 10-35 % ) .
In contrast , the majority of EKLF*'~ colonies expressed y-globin at low levels , Fig .
3 .
Increased fetal ( 7 ) globin protein in EKLF-'- erythroid cells .
Immunofluorescence of E14 fetal liver ( a and b ) cytocentrifuge preparations after staining with a monoclonal antibody ( 9C3 ) raised against human HbF ( a2y ; ) .
A high percentage of EKLF-'- erythroid cells ( a ) express detectable amounts of human y-globin , whereas few EKLF*~ erythroid cells ( b ) do so .
( c and d ) Immunofluorescence of the same fields as shown in a and b after staining with 0.001 % 4 ' 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole ( DAPI ) HCI .
( x600 . )
although 3 of 12 expressed y-globin at a level overlapping that seen in EKLF-'~- colonies .
Therefore , in the absence of EKLF , a higher proportion of erythroid colonies at E13 exhibit a program of high y-globin expression .
We also examined the distribution of y-globin protein and mRNA at the individual cell and colony level .
As shown by immunofluorescence ( Fig .
3 ) , a higher percentage of E14 fetal liver cells from EKLF-~- ( ~30 % ) versus EKLF*/~- ( ~8 % ) embryos stained positively for y-globin protein .
Therefore , not only was the level of y-globin expression increased in erythroid populations , but the proportion of erythroid cells expressing y-globin protein was also greater in EKLF-'- embryos .
DISCUSSION In transgenic mice , the human B-globin gene can be transcribed at all developmental stages , but its expression in embryonic cells is silenced competitively by the upstream sand y-genes ( 8 , 9 , 29 ) .
Although down-regulation of the y-gene at the adult stage is initiated in the absence of a linked -globin gene ( 6 ) , the relative contribution of such autonomous control versus competition by a B-globin gene to the silencing of y-globin gene is unresolved .
Impaired silencing of the y-globin gene in adult erythroid cells lacking EKLF provides strong evidence that-competition by an active B-globin gene for a common regulatory component , such as the LCR , plays an important role in the y- to B-globin switch .
Although we consider it very unlikely , it is formally possible that EKLF could regulate an adult-stage repressor of y-gene expression and thereby silence the y-gene independent of competition by an active -globin gene .
The consistent increased y-globin expression observed in patients heterozygous for B-promoter deletions ( 19 ) or CACC box mutations ( 18 ) argues in favor of a cis-acting mechanism for impaired y-si-lencing .
Since EKLF is present and active at both embryonic and adult stages ( 16 , 30 ) , we presume that absence of -globin expression at the embryonic stage reflects more effective competition of the s- and y-globin genes for the LCR at early times by virtue of their proximity to the LCR and/or a regulatory milieu favoring their expression ( 8 , 13 , 25 ) .
Several possibilities may account for nonrescue of EKLF-'-embryos by the B-YAC transgene .
Excess a-globin chain toxicity may not be alleviated due either to insufficient human Biochemistry : Perkins et al .
normal EKLF absent | +globin `` L | EKLF § -globin | L B-globin c| @ © | C a- -- -+ |R| < - » | a- » |R a- - - { | \ _ // ‘ \ Z X of X Fig .
4 .
Proposed mechanism by which EKLF facilitates y-gene silencing .
In late fetal and adult erythroid cells , EKLF ( shaded circle ) bound to the -globin promoter ( hatched box ) mediates protein-protein interactions with the LCR .
The affinity of this interaction is sufficiently strong as to be favored over association of the y-globin promoter ( thin striped box ) with the LCR .
In the absence of EKLF , the affinity of the LCR-B-promoter interaction is weak , resulting in enhanced probability of a productive LCR-y-promoter interaction .
y-globin chain accumulation or to inefficient assembly of human y-globin and mouse « -globin into hemoglobin tetram-ers .
In addition , other putative EKLF target genes may be missing in EKLF~'~ embryos and contribute the hemolytic anemia .
Since we have observed readily detectable hybrid ( huy ; -mua ; ) hemoglobin ( A.C.P .
and K. Peterson , unpublished results ) in EKLF-'- erythroid cells derived from breeding with a transgenic strain of mice expressing high levels of human Ay-globin ( 31 ) , we currently favor this latter possibility .
Heterogeneity in the level of y-globin gene expression in individual erythroid colonies is consistent with stochastic models in which it is envisioned that the LCR may interact in an alternate fashion with downstream y or B-globin genes in individual cells over time ( 32 ) .
Accordingly , the probability of y- versus B-gene expression would depend on the specific affinities of the interactions between the y- and B- globin promoters and the LCR .
The respective affinities would reflect the milieu of nuclear regulatory proteins within the cell .
Persistence of a program of y-globin gene expression in the majority of EKLF -- colonies suggests that EKLF may serve a critical role in mediating communication between the B-globin promoter and the LCR ( Fig .
4 ) .
Most simply , communication may be achieved through physical interactions with other nuclear proteins , such as the erythroid factor GATA-1 , bound to the LCR ( 33 ) or a non-DNA binding adapter molecule ( s ) that links EKLF bound to the B-promoter to LCR-bound protein ( s ) .
The indirect role by which EKLF facilitates y-globin gene silencing may provide a general mechanism for developmental control within the B-globin locus .
For example , transcription factors that interact specifically with the s- and y-globin genes may stabilize their interaction with the LCR and thereby serve to repress B-ex-pression at early developmental stages .
Accordingly , y- to -globin switching is likely to reflect the cumulative interactions of trans-acting factors with the LCR and regulatory sequences throughout the human B-globin locus , rather than the effect of a single stage-specific regulatory factor .
We thank Dr. T. Campbell of Isolabs for providing fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated monoclonal antibodies specific for human HbF , and members of the Orkin laboratory for their suggestions .
A.C.P .
is a Traveling Fellow of the Lucille P. Markey Foundation .
S.H.O .
is an Investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute .
wo app ~N & 10 .
11 .
12 .
13 .
14 .
15 .
16 .
17 .
18 .
19 .
20 .
21 .
22 .
23 .
24 .
25 .
26 .
27 .
29 .
30 .
31 .
32 .
33 .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 93 ( 1996 ) - 12271 Hanscombe , O. , Vial , M. , Kaeda , J. , Luzzatto , L. , Greaves , D. R. & Grosveld , F. ( 1989 ) Genes Dev .
3 , 1572-1581 .
Orkin , S. H. ( 1995 ) Eur .
J. Biochem .
231 , 271-281 .
Choi , O.-R. & Engel , J. D. ( 1988 ) Cell 55 , 17-26 .
Chada , K. , Magram , J .
& Costantini , F. ( 1986 ) Nature ( London ) 319 , 685-689 .
Townes , T. M. , Lingrel , J .
B. , Chen , H. Y. , Brinster , R. L. & Palmiter , R. D. ( 1985 ) EMBO 4 , 1715-1723 .
Dillon , N. & Grosveld , F. ( 1991 ) Nature ( London ) 350 , 252-254 .
Behringer , R. R. , Ryan , T. M. , Palmiter , R. D. , Brinster , R. L. & Townes , T. M. ( 1990 ) Genes Dev .
4 , 380-389 .
Enver , T. , Raich , N. , Ebens , A. J. , Papayannopoulou , T. , Costantini , F. & Stamatoyannopoulos , G. ( 1990 ) Nature ( London ) 344 , 309-313 .
Lloyd , J .
A. , Krakowsky , J. M. , Crable , S.C. & Lingrel , J .
B .
( 1992 ) Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
12 , 1561-1567 .
Gaensler , K. M. L. , Kitamura , M. & Kan , Y. W. ( 1993 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 90 , 11381-11385 .
Peterson , K. R. , Clegg , C. H. , Huxley , C. , Josephson , B. M. , Haugen , H. S. , Furukawa , T. & Stamatoyannopoulos , G. ( 1993 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 90 , 7593-7597 .
Jane , S. M. , Ney , P. A. , Vanin , E. F. , Gumucio , D. L. & Nienhuis , A. W. ( 1992 ) EMBO J .
11 , 2961-2969 .
Jane , S. M. , Nienhuis , A. W. & Cunningham , J. M. ( 1995 ) EMBO J .
14 , 97-105 .
Miller , I. J .
& Bieker , J. J .
( 1993 ) Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
13 , 2776-2786 .
Feng , W. C. , Southwood , C. M. & Bicker , J. J .
( 1994 ) J. Biol .
Chem .
269 , 1493-1500 .
Perkins , A.C. , Sharpe , A. H. & Orkin , S. H. ( 1995 ) Nature ( London ) 375 , 318-322 .
Nuez , B. , Michalovich , D. , Bygrave , A. , Ploemacher , R. & Gorsveld , F. ( 1995 ) Nature ( London ) 375 , 316-318 .
Gonzalez-Redondo , J. M. , Stoming , T. A. , Lanclos , K. D. , Gu , Y. C. , Kutlar , A. , Kutlar , F. , Nakatsuji , T. , Deng , B. , Han , I. S. , McKie , V. C. & Huisman , T. H. J .
( 1988 ) Blood 72 , 1007-1014 .
Dimovski , A. J. , Divorky , V. , Adekile , A. D. , Baysal , E. , Wilson , J .
B. , Prior , J. F. , Raven , J. L. & Huisman , T. H. J .
( 1994 ) Blood 83 , 822-827 .
Ryan , T. M. , Behringer , R. R. , Martin , N. C. , Townes , T. M. , Palmiter , R. D. & Brinster , R. L. ( 1989 ) Genes Dev .
3 , 314-23 .
Kieran , M. W. , Perkins , A. C. , Orkin , S. H. & Zon , L. I .
( 1996 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 93 , 9126-9131 .
Chomezynski , P. & Sacchi , N. ( 1987 ) Anal .
Biochem .
162 , 156-159 .
Baron , M. H. & Maniatis , T. ( 1986 ) Cell 46 , 591-602 .
Weiss , M. J. , Keller , G. & Orkin , S. H. ( 1994 ) Genes Dev .
8 , 1184-1197 .
Strouboulis , J. , Dillon , N. & Grosveld , F. ( 1992 ) Genes Dev .
6 , 1857-1864 .
Stamatoyannopoulos , G. , Nienhaus , A. W. , Majerus , P. W. & Varmus , H. V. ( 1994 ) The Molecular Basis of Blood Diseases ( Saunders , Philadelphia ) , 2nd Ed .
, p. 127-132 .
Ley , T. J .
( 1991 ) Blood 77 , 1146-1152 .
Wong , P. M. , Clarke , B. J. , Carr , D. H. & Chui , D. H. ( 1982 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 79 , 2952-2956 .
Hanscombe , O. , Whyatt , D. , Fraser , P. , Yannoutsos , N. , Greaves , D. , Dillon , N. & Grosveld , F. ( 1991 ) Genes Dev .
5 , 1387-1394 .
Southwood , C. M. , Downs , K. M. & Bicker , J. J .
( 1996 ) Dev .
Dyn .
206 , 248-259 .
Stamatoyannopoulos , G. , Josephson , B. , Zhang , J.-W. & Li , Q .
( 1993 ) Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
13 , 7636-7644 .
Wijgerde , M. , Grosveld , F. & Fraser , P. ( 1995 ) Nature ( London ) 377 , 209-213 .
Merika , M. ; & Orkin , S. H. ( 1995 ) Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
15 , 2437-2447 .
