© 1996 Oxford University Press Nucleic Acids Research , 1996 , Vol .
24 , No .
23 4805-4811 Octamer independent activation of transcription from the kappa immunoglobulin germline promoter Anila Prabhu , Darin P .
O'Brien ?
, Georgia L. Weisner* , Regan Fulton® and Brian Van Ness !
2* 'Institute of Human Genetics , @ Department of Biochemistry and Department of Lab Medicine and Pathology , University of Minnesota , 515 Delaware Street SE , Minneapolis , MN 55455 , USA Received July 10 , 1996 ; Revised and Accepted October 8 , 1996 ABSTRACT Previous analyses of immunoglobulin V region promoters has led to the discovery of a common octamer motif which is functionally important in the tissue-specific and developmentally regulated transcriptional activation of immunoglobulin genes .
The germline promoters ( K° ) located upstream of the J region gene segments of the kappa locus also contain an octamer motif ( containing a single base pair mutation and referred to as the variant octamer ) which has been shown previously to bind Oct-1 and Oct-2 transcription factors in vitro .
To further elucidate the role of this variant octamer motif in the regulation of germline transcription from the unrearranged kappa locus , we have quantitated the relative binding affinity of Oct-1 and Oct-2 for the variant octamer motif and determined the functional role of this octamer motif in transcriptional activation .
We find that , although the variant octamer motif binds Oct-1 and Oct-2 in vitro with 5-fold lower affinity than the consensus octamer motif , mutation of the variant octamer motif to either a consensus octamer or non-octamer motif has no effect on transcriptional activation from the germline promoter .
We also find significant differences in activation of germline and V region promoters by kappa enhancers .
Our results suggest that the germline promoters and V region promoters differ in their dependence on octamer for activation and respond differently to enhancer activation .
These findings have important implications in regulation of germline transcription as well as concomitant activation of the V-J recombination of the kappa light chain locus .
INTRODUCTION The study of immunoglobulin ( Ig ) genes has provided important insights into the molecular mechanisms involved in the activation of transcription by tissue specific and developmentally regulated transcriptional regulatory regions .
In addition , key developmental stages of B cell development have been elucidated and defined by the study of Ig genes .
One such stage of development is the pre-B cell stage , defined by the presence of rearrangements at the heavy chain locus and the absence of rearrangements at the light chain locus ( 1,2 ) .
Furthermore , transcriptional activation of the unrearranged ( germline ) kappa light chain locus occurs at this stage of development ( 3 ) .
Interestingly , induction of germline transcription of the kappa locus occurs concomitantly with the activation of V-J recombination , leading to the suggestion that transcriptional activation of kappa is important in targeting the locus for recombination ( 4 ) .
Therefore , this hypothesis suggests that the early activation of germline transcription of the kappa locus plays an important role in B cell development .
The transcriptional activation of the kappa locus involves a number of transcriptional regulatory elements , including promoters and enhancers ( Fig .
1 A ) .
There is a promoter located 5 ' of each V region gene segment as well as two germline promoters ( K° ) 5¢ of the J gene segments in the unrearranged locus .
Although less is known about the regulation of kappa germline promoters , comparison of germline and V region promoters indicates that there are a number of important differences as well as some similarity between these promoters .
One of the common features of V region promoters is the presence of a highly conserved octamer sequence ( ATTTGCAT ) .
The importance of the octamer motif in transcription from V region promoters has been documented previously ( 5-8 ) .
Comparison of V region and germline promoters suggests little sequence conservation other than the presence of this octamer motif .
However , the octamer motif in the germline promoters contains a single transition , has an inverted orientation ( ATGTAAAT ) , and is referred to here as the variant octamer .
Furthermore , the V region promoters contain a TATA box while the germline promoters do not .
In addition to these sequence differences , it has been reported that there are functional differences between the germline and V region promoters since the rate of transcription from the V region promoters is approximately three to six times greater than the germline promoters 3 ) .
Sequence analysis of the kappa germline promoter of the murine and human loci led to the identification of a highly conserved 80 bp region flanking the variant octamer which has a 78 % homology between the two species ( 9 ) .
In addition to the sequence similarities observed in this region , the germline transcripts in these two different species are processed in a similar manner ( 0 ) .
Based on the functional importance of the octamer in the V region promoters and the presence of the variant octamer in the *To whom correspondence should be addressed at : UMHC , Box 206 , University of Minnesota , Minneapolis , MN 55455 , USA .
Tel : +1 612 624 9944 ; Fax : +1 612 626 7031 ; Email : vanness @ lenti.med.umn.edu *Present address : Center for Human Genetics , 11001 Cedar Avenue , Suite 510 , Case Western Reserve University , Cleveland , OH 44106 , USA A ¥ J C Kp 5 Gp - 3 Gp ~ H- @ ATGTAAT ATGanaRT B [ Kpop ] Kp.luc/Gp.luc [ xprop } - [ Luciferase _ ] IM.Kp.Jue/M.Gp.lue [ z ennancer __|- [ KpGp } [ tusiforase ] - - 3KE.Kp.Juo/ @ 'KE.Gp.luc 3 enhancer —immnnnhnnc¢r HKEGE H Luciferase i— 3'KE.IM.Kp.lue/3'KE.IM.Gp.luc Figure 1 .
Organization of the endogenous kappa light chain locus and reporter vectors .
( A ) Organization of the endogenous kappa locus .
Coding regions , including variable gene segments ( V ) , joining gene segments ( J ) , and the constant region gene segment ( C ) are indicated .
Transcriptional regulatory regions including the intron enhancer ( IM ) , the 3 ' kappa enhancer ( 3'KE ) , the germline promoters ( 5 % Gp and 3'Gp ) and a representative VK region promoter ( Kp ) are shown ( not drawn to scale ) .
( B ) Schematic representation of the reporter gene vectors used in transient transfection assays .
Luciferase expression vectors driven by either the germline ( Gp ) or Vk21E ( Kp ) promoter with either the intron enhancer , the 3 ' enhancer or both enhancers are shown .
Reporter vector nomenclature is indicated to the right of each vector .
germline promoters , it was our hypothesis that the variant octamer motif within the germline kappa promoter was responsible for the 3-6-fold difference observed between the transcriptional activity of the germline and V region promoters .
Moreover , it was possible that this difference in the transcriptional activity from the germline and V region promoters could be attributed to the differences in the affinity of the germline and V region promoters for octamer binding factors .
To test this hypothesis , we quantitated the difference in binding affinity between germline and V region octamer motifs and determined the functional significance of the octamer motif in transcriptional activation of germline promoters .
Our results suggest that unlike the octamer dependent transcription from the V region promoters , transcriptional activation of kappa germline promoters appears to be octamer independent .
This clearly distinguishes the germline promoters from the octamer dependent transcription of the V region promoters .
Moreover , we note that the germline and V region promoters show differences in response to the kappa enhancers .
MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell culture and nuclear extracts The pre-B cell lines 3-1 , 38B9 , 1-8 and the myeloma cell line $ 194 have been characterized previously ( 10,11 ) .
The pre-B cell line 38B9 was kindly provided by Eugene Oltz ( Vanderbilt University ) .
Cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 ( Gibco BRL , Gaithersburg , MD ) , 10 % FCS , 25 U/ml penicillin , 25 ug/ml streptomycin , 2 mM L-glutamine and 50 uM B-mercaptoethanol .
Nuclear extracts were prepared using a previously described modification ( 12 ) of the method outlined by Dignam et al .
( 13 ) .
Vector construction and transient transfections The construction of luciferase expression vectors ( Kp.luc , IM.Kp.luc , 3'KE.IM.Kp.luc , Gp.luc , IM.Gp.luc , YKE.IM.Gp.luc , Nucleic Acids Research , 1996 , Vol .
24 , No .
23 - 4825 and IM.Gp .
( OCT ) luc used for transient transfections were described previously ( 14 ) .
IM.Kp.oct-.luec and IM.Gp.oct-.luc were constructed by overlap PCR mutagenesis with oligos containing a 3 bp mutation in the octamer site ( 5-ACA GCC AAT CTG AAC ATT TCA GAG GCT TAG-3 ' for IM.Gp.oct-.lue and 5 `` -TCT GCT GAG CTG ATG TTC AGA TGG AGT CAT-3 ' for IM.Kp.oct-.luc ) and confirmed by sequencing .
Mouse B-cell lines were transfected by a modification of the DEAE-dextran method ( 15,16 ) .
Briefly , 10 x 10° cells per transfection were washed once in sterile TS ( 137 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCI , 0.6 mM NazHPO , .7H20 , 25 mM Tris , 0.5 mM MgC ) , 0.7 mM CaCl ) , pH 7.4 ) and resuspended in 50 ul TS at 37°C .
Ten ug test plasmid and 10 ug of the control plasmid , pCH110 , a -galactosidase expression vector ( Pharmacia , Piscataway , NJ ) , purified by two CsCI gradients , were resuspended in 1.5 ml TS containing 10 ul of 10 mg/ml DEAE-dextran ( 67 ug/l final concentration ) and warmed to 37°C .
The cells were added to the plasmid/TS/DEAE-dextran solution and mixed by pipetting .
The mixture was allowed to sit at 37°C for 20 min .
Cells were washed once in sterile TS and placed in a 10 ml volume at 37°C and 7 % CO ; .
Ten ug/ml of LPS ( Difco , Detroit , MI ) was used for induction of pre B cell lines .
Transfection of each plasmid construct was performed in triplicate .
Cells were harvested 18 h after transfection and luciferase and -galactosidase assays were performed as previously described ( 17 ) .
Briefly , we assayed luciferase and -galactosidase activities from each of the three transfections and luciferase activity was normalized to -galactosidase activity for each sample ( luciferase RLU/B-galactosidase RLU ) .
The mean of the normalized luciferase activity and the standard error of the mean are indicated for each plasmid construct .
Probes The probes used for mobility shift assays were end-labeled with T4 polynucleotide kinase ( NEB ) to a specific activity of 0.5 % 10° to 1 x 10° c.p.m./ug .
A 260 bp fragment containing the variant octamer of the human germline promoter was amplified with primers 5-ACA AAG CTT TGA GGG GCT CGT-¥ and 5-CAC GTC GAC ATG CGT GGG ACA CAA AT-3 ' , and digested with Psfl at 37°C for 2 h prior to gel purification .
The 130 bp probe containing the variant octamer from the mouse germline promoter was amplified with primers 5-ACA CGT CTA GAG TAA GCT GGA-3 ' and 5-CCC GGA TCC CTG CAG CCA TTT CAC TTC AGA TGA A-3 ' .
Mobility shift assay Approximately 10 000 c.p.m .
( 1-5 fmole of DNA ) of end-labeled DNA probe were added to a 15 ul binding reaction containing 10 mM Tris-HCI ( pH 7.4 ) , 5 % ( v/v ) glycerol , 50 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM DTT , 0.3 mM ATP , 2.5-5 ug of sheared salmon sperm DNA ( ssDNA , Sigma ) and 5-10 ug nuclear extract protein ( 18 ) .
After incubation at 25°C for 30 min , the binding reaction was loaded on a 4.5 % polyacrylamide gel containing 40 mM Tris , 0.384 M glycine and 2 mM EDTA .
The samples were subjected to electrophoresis at 8 V/cm , and the gel was dried and exposed to X-ray film for 12-24 h. Competitive binding assays were performed by adding 100 or 250-fold amounts of unlabeled 24 bp octamer containing fragments to the binding buffer and incubating at room temperature for 5 min prior to addition of the consensus octamer fragment .
The reaction was incubated for an additional 30 min and 4826 Nucleic Acids Research , 1996 , Vol .
24 , No .
23 A Pre-B cell line 3-1 n ¥ region SKE.IM.Kp.lug P rogmier 3KE.Kp.lue IM.Kp.Juc « LPS Kp.luc WR media 0 1 2 B SKE.IM.Gp.luc Germline Promoter IM.Gp lug @ ars Gip.luc W media 6 1 2 Luminescence C Mature B cell line $ 194 ¥ region SKE.IM.Kp.luc [ MARIE Promoter [ } IM.Kp luc [ Ne ) Kp.luc j t t u 0.06 - - v 0.04 D SKE.IM.Gp.luc ( Wie Germline Promoter 3KE.Gp.luc [ § im.Gip.luc [ AB ] Gip lue r r t 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 Luminescence Figure 2 .
The germline promoter is a weaker promoter than a V region promoter in pre-B and mature B cell lines .
Luciferase reporter vectors used for the transient transfection experiments are shown in Figure 1B .
Results of transfection of the 3-1 pre-B cell line with constructs containing either the V region promoter ( A ) or the germline promoter ( B ) are shown .
Solid bars represent uninduced activity and hatched bars represent activity induced with 10ug/ml of LPS .
Additionally , transfection of the mature B cell line $ 194 with vectors containing either the V region promoter ( C ) or the germline promoter ( D ) is also indicated .
Transfection efficiency was normalized by co-transfection with the -galactosidase expression vector , pCH110 , and dividing luciferase activity by B-galactosidase activity .
The ratio is labeled luminescence and error bars represent the standard error of the mean .
subjected to electrophoresis as described above .
Alternatively , the competition reaction was performed by proportionately increasing the binding reaction volume 10-fold , adding the y- > > P-labeled consensus octamer fragment as probe and incubating for 30 min .
Cold competitor ( 250-fold ) was then added to the binding reaction and 15 pl aliquots were loaded on a polyacrylamide gel in 5-15 min intervals over 90 min .
After autoradiography , densitometric analysis was performed to determine the relative density of the bands corresponding to the protein-DNA complexes .
DNase I protection Binding reactions used for mobility shift assays were increased 5-10-fold and contained 25-50 ug of induced or uninduced nuclear extract from 3-1 pre B cells and either a 160 bp human or 130 bp mouse germline labeled fragment as previously described ( 19 ) .
After incubating for 30 min at room temperature , 2.5 U of DNase I in a buffer containing 10 mM Tris-HC ] ( pH 7.6 ) , 5 mM CaCh and 10 mM MgC ) ; were added to the solution and incubated for 3-5 min on ice and terminated by the addition of 2 p of 0.5 M EDTA .
The complex was then either gel purified or immediately phenol extracted and ethanol precipitated with 20 ug of carrier tRNA .
If the complexes were gel purified , the solution was applied to a 5 % polyacrylamide gel and subjected to electrophoresis .
Bands were identified by autoradiography , excised from the wet gel , and the DNA was recovered by diffusion over 6-10 h into a buffer containing 0.5 M sodium acetate , 1 mM EDTA , 10 mM magnesium acetate and 0.1 % SDS .
After centrifugation through siliconized glass wool , the products were phenol extracted and ethanol precipitated with 20 ug of tRNA .
The DNA was resuspended in 5 Ul of loading buffer and the fragments were separated on a 6 % polyacrylamide-8 M urea denaturing gel next to lanes containing free , or unbound probe treated with DNase I , and an A+G sequence of each region ( 12 ) , dried and exposed to X-ray film .
Statistical analysis Statistical analysis of the data was performed by Student 's t-test and Statswork software .
Probability ( P ) values < 0.05 were considered significant .
RESULTS Germline promoters are weaker than V region promoters in pre-B and mature B cell lines To determine the role of the octamer motif in activation of germline transcription , we utilized reporter test constructs with either the Vk21E promoter ( designated Kp ) or the kappa 5 germline promoter ( designated Gp ) to drive expression of a luciferase reporter gene .
Derivative vectors were made by inserting either the kappa intron enhancer ( IM ) or the 3 kappa enhancer ( 3'KE ) or both as shown in Figure 1B .
In the absence of LPS , a strong inducer of kappa transcription , the vectors containing either the V region promoter ( Kp ) or the germline promoter ( Gp ) alone ( no enhancers present ) show relatively little activity in pre-B cell lines ( Fig .
2 ) .
Even in the presence of LPS , the germline and V region promoters by themselves or in the presence of the 3 ' kappa enhancer are not significantly inducible ( Fig .
2A and B ) .
On the other hand , we observe that in pre-B cells , both the germline and the V region promoters were activated by LPS when paired with the intron enhancer ( Fig .
2A and B ) .
Comparison of LPS induced transcriptional activity of IM.Gp.luc and IM.Kp.luc indicates a 2-4-fold greater increase in the latter case ( P < 0.026 ) in the pre-B cell line 3-1 ( Fig .
2A and B ) .
Identical results were seen in another pre-B cell line , 1-8 ( data not shown ) .
In the pre-B cell line 3-1 , the presence of both the enhancers with the V region promoter ( 3'KE.IM.Kp.Juc ) resulted in transcriptional activity equivalent to the activity observed with the intron enhancer alone ( IM.Kp.luc ) ( Fig .
2A ) .
However , constructs with the intron enhancer and 3 `` kappa enhancer paired with the germline promoter ( 3'KE.IM.Gp.luc ) resulted in a statistically significant decrease ( P < 0.047 ) in transcriptional activity in 3-1 cells compared with the presence of the germline promoter with the intron enhancer alone ( IM.Gp.luc ) ( Fig .
2B ) .
Figure 2B is representative of multiple experiments that consistently show suppression of the germline promoter with the addition of the KE sequence elements .
This decrease is due to suppression of both uninduced and induced activity .
This suppressive effect of 3'KE on the germline promoter was also observed in the pre-B cell line 1-8 ( data not shown ) .
Transfections of the myeloma cell line $ 194 demonstrate that both the intron and the 3 ' kappa enhancer are active at this stage of B cell development ( Fig .
2C and D ) .
Furthermore , we observed a 2-5-fold difference in the reporter gene expression from the germline and V region promoters which is consistent with differences from endogenous V region and germline promoters noted previously ( 3 ) .
The difference between activation of the germline and V region promoters may lie in the ability of the 3 ' enhancer to preferentially activate the V region promoter .
Consistent with this explanation , we found that the transcriptional activity of the germline promoter with both enhancers is the additive sum of either enhancer alone ( Fig .
2D ) .
However , with the V region promoter we observed that the presence of both enhancers results in transcriptional activity that is more than the additive sum of the individual transcriptional activities observed with either the intron or the 3 kappa enhancer alone ( Fig .
2C ) .
Based on these results we conclude that , ( i ) in pre-B cells , both the germline and the V region promoters are dependent on the intron enhancer , ( ii ) in both pre-B and mature B cells , the germline promoter is weaker than the V region promoter , ( iii ) in pre-B cells , the 3 ' enhancer has no effect on the LPS inducibility of the V region promoter but appears to suppress the germline promoter and ( iv ) enhancer synergy is observed only in mature B cells with the V region promoter and not with the germline promoter .
The Oct-1 and Oct-2 transcription factors bind to the variant octamer of the germline promoter It has been shown previously that nuclear factors Oct-1 and Oct-2 bind to the variant octamer present in the germline promoter of the mouse kappa locus ( 20 ) .
Although there is a remarkable amount of sequence conservation between human and mouse germline promoters in the region containing the variant octamer , there are some differences in the region flanking the variant octamer motif .
To determine the effect of these differences on the ability of the variant octamer in the human germline promoter to bind Oct-1 and Oct-2 , we performed gel shift analysis with a probe corresponding to the human germline promoter .
The results of this analysis suggest that a 24 bp probe containing the human variant octamer ( Fig .
3A , II ) forms complexes indistinguishable from those seen with a consensus octamer probe ( Fig .
3A , I ) .
Furthermore , we find that similar analysis of Oct-1 and Oct-2 complexes with a human 160 bp probe or a murine 130 bp probe containing the germline promoters resulted in complexes very similar to complexes observed with the 24 bp probe ( Fig .
3A , H-160 versus M-130 ) .
We have also observed that the signal intensities of complexes with the variant octamer are consistently less than those observed with the consensus octamer probe .
These results suggest that the human germline variant octamer binds Oct-1 and Oct-2 in vitro and that sequences flanking the variant octamer do not contribute significantly to the binding of Oct-1 and Oct-2 .
The failure to detect complexes other than Oct-1 and Oct-2 with the 160 bp and 130 bp probes suggests that only Oct-1 and Oct-2 are capable of binding to this region in vitro .
Nucleic Acids Research , 1996 , Vol .
24 , No .
23 - 4827 To further evaluate the potential contribution of sequences flanking the variant octamer to the binding of Oct-1 and Oct-2 or other proteins not detected by gel shift analysis , we used DNase I footprinting to analyze protection of specific residues in protein-bound complexes .
If differences in transcriptional activity between germline and V region promoters are due to differences in nuclear factors bound by the octamer motif which are not detected by gel shift analysis , such differences may be detected by DNase I footprint analysis .
Footprint analysis of uninduced and induced complexes bound to the variant germline promoter reveals an equivalent 18 bp region of protection ( Fig .
3B ) .
The pattern of protection observed with the variant octamer motif is similar to that observed with the consensus octamer motif ( 21 ) .
Oct-1 and Oct-2 have a decreased relative affinity for the human and the mouse variant octamer motif We have consistently found that octamer complexes with the mouse and human germline promoter containing the variant octamer produce bands of weaker intensity in comparison with complexes with the consensus octamer motif .
The correlation between apparently weaker octamer binding to the variant octamer with decreased transcriptional activity of germline promoters suggested to us that the difference in affinity for octamer binding proteins may have important functional consequences .
In order to quantitate the differences in octamer protein binding to the consensus and the variant octamer sites , we performed the gel shift competition experiments shown in Figure 4A .
The 24 bp human V region probe containing the consensus octamer motif was used as a probe for detection of octamer binding activity in nuclear extracts from LPS induced pre-B cells .
Competition for binding to this probe was performed with increasing concentrations of either unlabeled V region ( consensus octamer ) or germline promoter ( variant octamer ) sequences .
The results of this analysis suggest that the consensus octamer competes better than the variant octamer ( Fig .
4A ) .
Comparison of the slopes of the lines derived from the relative density of Oct-1 for the consensus and the variant octamer provides an indication of the relative affinity of the Oct-1 protein for the consensus and the variant octamer ( Fig .
4B ) .
The results of this analysis suggest that the relative affinity of the octamer binding proteins for the variant octamer is 5-fold lower than that of the consensus octamer .
Our results indicate that the fold difference observed in the binding of octamer proteins correlated with the fold differences observed in the transcriptional activity from V region and germline promoters .
Functional analysis of the variant octamer in germline transcription in pre-B and mature B cells To further test whether the relatively low level of transcription from the germline promoter compared with the V region promoter was due to the differences in the binding affinity of Oct-1 and Oct-2 , we first mutated the variant octamer in the germline promoter to a consensus octamer site , [ designated Gp .
( oct ) .luc ] .
The functional effect of this mutation was then tested by transient transfection in pre-B and mature B cell lines .
In addition , we also created a null mutation of the consensus octamer in the V region ( designated Kp.oct-.luc ) to produce a non-octamer site that is unable to bind octamer binding proteins ( data not shown ) .
4828 Nucleic Acids Research , 1996 , Vol .
24 , No .
23 A .
B. A+G F BU BI F A+G Oct-1 -m w Oct-2 -m litte at f « pes ie [ 3 a & 51 lete e OTT `` oun | - =-Pu LJ -- lhat Lane 123 4 5 67 8 $ s 10112131415 M H-160 M-130 ~~ as me n » l Figure 3 .
Protein binding to the octamer sequence in the germline promoter .
( A ) Mobility shift assays of the human and the mouse germline promoter .
Oligonucleotide probes ( 24 bp ) containing the human consensus ( I ) or variant ( II ) octamer motif were incubated with nuclear extracts from uninduced ( - ) or LPS induced ( + ) 3-1 mouse pre-B cells , or in vitro translated Oct-2a protein ( Oct-2 ) .
The observed difference in mobility between their vifro translated Oct-2 protein and the Oct-2 from the extracts is due to the difference in size between human and mouse Oct-2 protein as described previously ( 34 ) .
Alternatively , a 160 bp human fragment ( H-160 ) or a 130 bp mouse fragment ( M-130 ) containing the variant octamer was used as probe ( extracts and proteins as indicated ) .
Specific octamer containing complexes ( Oct-1 and Oct-2 ) and free probe ( F ) are indicated by arrows .
( B ) DNase I footprint analysis of the mouse germlinepromoter fragments .
The 130 bp fragment containing the mouse variant octamer motif was end labeled on the antisense strand and incubated with nuclear extracts from uninduced and LPS induced 3-1 pre-B cells .
DNA from bound complexes from binding reactions containing extracts from either uninduced ( BU ) or induced ( BI ) cells was gel purified and analyzed on a denaturing acrylamide gel ( see Materials and Methods ) .
Free probe was purified as a control and ran next to an A/G sequencing reaction for identification of sequences protected .
The bracket indicates the location of the variant octamer motif within the protected area .
As expected , the null mutation of the octamer motif in the V region promoter resulted in a dramatic decrease in transcriptional activity in both pre-B and mature B cell lines ( Fig .
5 ) , demonstrating that the octamer motif plays an important role in the activation from these promoters .
Interestingly , the mutations of the variant octamer to a consensus octamer in the germline promoter had no significant effect on transcriptional activity from the germline promoter ( Fig .
5 ) .
This result was inconsistent with our expectation that conversion of the variant octamer to a consensus octamer site would increase transcriptional activity from germline promoters .
Therefore , to further elucidate the role , if any , of the variant octamer motif in transcription from the germline promoter , we mutated the variant octamer to the null mutation described above in the V region promoter .
Interestingly , the functional analysis of this mutant construct ( Gp.oct-.luc ) shows that there was no significant difference in transcriptional activity from the germline promoter containing the variant octamer or the one containing the octamer with the null mutation ( Fig .
5 ) .
Therefore , our results indicate that in pre-B and mature B cell lines , it was of little consequence whether a variant , consensus or a mutated octamer ( null mutation ) motif was present in the germline promoter since the transcriptional activity from the germline promoter was comparable in all three cases .
These results demonstrate that although the variant octamer has some capacity to bind Oct-1 and Oct-2 in vitro , it does not have any demonstrable functional role in the transcriptional activation of germline promoters .
DISCUSSION In this study we have utilized vectors containing the germline promoter ( Gp ) or V region promoter ( Kp ) with either the kappa intron enhancer ( IM ) , 3 enhancer ( 3'KE ) , or both to address the observed difference in promoter strength of the germline and V region promoters .
Our results indicate that the binding affinity of Oct factors to the variant octamer within the germline promoter is 5-fold less than that of the consensus octamer present in the V region promoter .
Therefore , it was our hypothesis that the difference between the transcriptional activity of the germline and V region promoters could be explained by the presence of the variant octamer in the germline promoter .
We found that the intron enhancer mediated activation of both the V region and germline promoters in pre B cells .
However , we detect little or no activation of either promoter by the 3 ' enhancer in pre-B cells .
Furthermore , reporter constructs containing both enhancers with the V region promoter ( 3'KE.IM.Kp.luc ) had activity similar to that of the intron enhancer alone with the V region promoter ( IM.Kp.luc ) , however with the germline promoter we observed a significant decrease in transcriptional activity upon addition of the 3 `` enhancer .
These results suggest the possibility that the 3 ' enhancer is able to suppress activation of germline promoters in pre-B cells .
This result indicates that there is a promoter preference regarding the negative regulation by the 3 ' kappa enhancer .
In the mature B cell line , $ 194 , we observed that the promoters by themselves had a low basal level of transcriptional activity .
A. car -- - @ Geo- pares # Oct-2 -- D - m un E ; - D un E ; in -s -a o o G $ > /- L - Fold Excess of Unlabeled Fragment a 1 » a 77 _ Consensus Variant lkh Octamer Octamer B .
10007 C Concensus Octamer A variant Octamer ) es 1 o ' `` * % `` Wh——_______ > t 5 8 104 ra o .2 E o ® & 1 T T 1 0 100 200 300 Fold Excess ( pM ) Figure 4 .
Comparison of Oct-1 and Oct-2 binding affinity of the germline variant octamer and the Vk consensus octamer .
( A ) Competition of consensus octamer binding activity with consensus and variant octamer motifs .
The V probe containing the consensus octamer was incubated with nuclear extracts from uninduced or LPS induced cells ( LPS , +LPS ) .
Competition of octamer binding activity in LPS induced extracts with increasing molar excess of cold consensus , variant or unrelated Kb competitor is also shown .
( B ) Densitometric analysis of consensus and variant octamer competition of Oct-1 binding activity .
A semi-log plot of the relative density of the Oct-1 bands versus fold excess of unlabeled consensus octamer ( open square ) or variant octamer ( triangles ) was used to quantitate binding diffrences between the consensus and variant octamer .
Presence of the intron or the 3 ' kappa enhancer increased the transcriptional activity of both the V region and the germline promoter .
However , significantly higher transcriptional activity was observed in the presence of both the enhancers with the V region promoter ( 3'KE.IM.Kp.luc ) than both enhancers with the germline promoter ( 3'KE.IM.Gp.luc ) .
In both the pre-B and mature B cell lines we observed that the germline promoter was consistently weaker than the V region promoter .
These results are consistent with a previous analysis of kappa transcription from germline and rearranged alleles in plasmacytomas in which it was found that transcription from the rearranged alleles was 3-6-fold higher than the germline allele ( 3 ) .
It was our hypothesis that the difference in transcriptional activity between the germline and V region promoters was due to the presence of the variant octamer in the germline promoter .
The octamer motif is an important regulatory sequence present 5 of virtually all Ig V genes of the heavy and light chain locus and is Nucleic Acids Research , 1996 , Vol .
24 , No .
23 - 4829 also present in the enhancer elements in Ig genes ( 19,22-24 ) .
The octamer motif is highly conserved and has been implicated in the induction of transcription from the heavy and light chain V region promoters by deletion analysis ( 5,7,23 ) .
We and others have also recognized that the mouse and human germline promoters contained a variant octamer motif ( 9,18 ) .
In this study we demonstrated that the single base pair transition in the variant octamer resulted in a decreased binding affinity but did not abolish the recognition of this variant octamer motif by Oct-1 and Oct-2 nuclear factors .
Our data suggest that the relative affinity of Oct-1 and Oct-2 for the variant octamer motif was 5-fold lower than the consensus octamer and this difference closely correlates with the differences in the promoter activity of the germline promoter and V region promoter in transient transfection assays .
Non-consensus octamer motifs have been identified in other genes that demonstrate decreased binding affinity to the Oct-1 and Oct-2 nuclear factors and also a decrease in transcriptional activity ( 25 ) .
Atchinson et al .
reported the presence of a variant octamer in the V region promoter of Vk19 .
This variant octamer binds to nuclear factors Oct-1 and Oct-2 weakly compared with the variant octamer present in germline promoters of the kappa light chain .
It was observed that to compensate for an ineffectual octamer present in the Vk19 promoter , an upstream K-Y element was important for the normal transcriptional activity ( 20 ) .
Similarly , Eaton and Calame have demonstrated the role of flanking heptamer and pyrimidine rich sequences in octamer dependent transcription from the V region promoters of the Ig heavy chain ( 26 ) .
An additional DNA element , called the BAT box with AT rich sequences , has been implicated in transcription of the CD20/B1 promoter which contains a variant octamer motif ( 27 ) .
We have found no homology to the K-Y element , heptamer or pyrimidine rich sequences in the kappa germline promoters upon computer sequence analysis .
In addition , footprint analysis of the human germline promoter as well as previous analysis of the mouse octamer motif ( 20 ) reveals an 18 bp region which is protected and this footprint is not affected by additional flanking sequence .
Surprisingly , we observed that the deletion of the variant octamer present in the germline promoter had no effect on transcription from this promoter .
These results are consistent with the results from Oct-2 knockout mice which have no detectable Oct-2 protein binding activity ( 28 ) .
These mice have apparently normal numbers of pre-B cells but have a greatly diminished capacity to secrete immunoglobulin at later stages of B cell development .
Our finding that the variant octamer site in the germline promoter is not required for germline promoter activation but is required for V region promoter activation is consistent with a role for Oct-2 in later stages of B cell development but not early B cell development .
The presence of the TATA box and a functionally important octamer in the V region promoters is an important distinction between the V region and germline promoters .
Although the distance between the germline and the V region promoters from the enhancers is different , the difference in transcriptional activity between the V region and the germline promoter is not position dependent because equal promoter strengths have been observed over considerable distance from the enhancer ( 29 ) .
If the presence of the variant octamer in the germline promoter is not functionally relevant , the question arises as to what constitutes the germline promoter .
Our data thus far indicate that the germline promoter serves as a minimal promoter , completely dependent on activation by the intron enhancer .
If accessibility and V-J recombination of the 4830 Nucleic Acids Research , 1996 , Vol .
24 , No .
23 A Fre-B cell line 3-1 IM.Kp .
oct-.lug IM.Kp.luc IM.Gp.oct-luc IM.Gp .
( oct ) .Juc FZZP IM.Gp.luc -Z ] 9.0 0.4 0.3 1.2 B IM.Kp.oct-luc IM.Kp.luc IM.Gp.oct-.lug IM.Gp .
{ oct } .
lus IM.Gp.lug Pre-B cell line 1-8 a LPS media 0.9 0s 1.9 Luminescence C Pre-B cell line 38B9 IM.Kp.oct-.lue IM.Kp.luc IM.Gp.oct- Jug IM.Gp .
{ oct ) lue ﬁzz .
IM.Gip -luc FF t + u 0.00 0.10 9.26 6.31 U ifs TB media D IM.Kp.oct-.lug IM.Kp lue IM.Gp.oct-.lue IM.Gp .
( oct ) .lue IM.Gp.lue 0.000 Mature B cell line $ 194 a.o20 Luminescence Figure 5 .
Functional analysis of the octamer motif in the germline and V region promoters .
The pre-B cell lines 3-1 ( A ) , 1-8 ( B ) , and 38B9 ( C ) and plasmacytoma cell line $ 194 ( D ) were transiently transfected with plasmid constructs with the intron enhancer and either the germline or V region promoter ( IM.Gp.luc/IM.Kp.luc ) .
Reporter constructs containing mutations ( to either a consensus octamer site or a non-octamer site which lacks octamer binding activity ) in the germline and V region promoters were also used for transfection .
These vectors include , IM.Gp .
( oct ) .luc which contains a mutation in the variant octamer motif to give a consensus octamer motif and IM.Gp.oct-.luc/IM.Kp.oct-.luc which contain a null mutation of the octamer motif .
Transfection efficiency was normalized by co-transfection of thef } -galactosidase expression vector , pCH110 , and dividing luciferase activity by B-galactosidase activity .
Mean of triplicate transfections and standard error of the mean are shown .
kappa locus is dependent on germline transcription , then our data suggest that the developmentally regulated accessibility of the kappa locus is solely dependent on the activation of the intron enhancer .
Our functional data from transient transfection experiments indicate that in pre-B cells , transcription from the germline promoter proceeds at a significantly higher rate in the presence of the intron enhancer compared with parallel experiments in which 3 ' enhancer was paired with the germline promoter .
We consistently observed a negative regulation by the 3 ' enhancer when present with the germline promoter .
The presence of the 3 ' enhancer with the V region promoter did not have any significant effect on transcriptional activity from this promoter in pre-B cells .
This raised the possibility that the negative regulation that we observed in the case of the 3 ' enhancer was promoter specific .
LPS inducibility of the 3 enhancer has been reported in some earlier studies ( 30,3 1 ) .
However , in these studies the functional role of the enhancers in development was studied by pairing them with heterologous promoters .
Our studies are more relevant since we have used either a germline or the V region promoter to address this issue .
Consistent with our observation are reports that have implicated the 3 ' enhancer in preventing precocious rearrangement of the kappa locus ( 32,33 ) .
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank Dr Eugene Oltz ( Vanderbilt University ) for pre B cell line 38B9 .
This work was supported by NIH Grant GM37687 .
REFERENCES 1 Staudt , L.M .
and Lenardo , M.J. ( 1991 ) Annu .
Rev .
Immunol .
, 9 , 373-398 .
2 Alt , EW .
, Blackwell , TK .
, DePinho , R.A. , Reth , M.G .
and Yancopoulos , G.D. ( 1986 ) Immunol .
Rev .
, 89 , 5-30 .
3 - Van Ness , B.G .
, Weigert , M. , Coleclough , C. , Mather , E.L. , Kelley , D.E .
and Perry , RP .
( 1981 ) Cell , 27 , 593-602 .
4 - Blackwell , TK .
, Moore , M.W .
, Yancopoulos , G.D. , Suh , H. , Lutzker , S. , Selsing , E. and Alt , EW .
( 1986 ) Nature , 324 , 585-589 .
5 Bergman , Y. , Rice , D. , Grosschedl , R. and Baltimore , D. ( 1984 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA , 81 , 7041-7045 .
10 11 12 13 23 24 26 27 28 29 30 31 33 34 Falkner , EG .
, Neumann , E. , and Zachau , H.G .
( 1984 ) Hoppe Seylers Z. Physiol .
Chem .
, 365 , 1331-1343 .
Mason , J.O .
, Williams , G.T .
and Neuberger , M.S .
( 1985 ) Cell , 41 , 479-487 .
Wirth , T. , Staudt , L. and Baltimore , D. ( 1987 ) Nature , 329 , 174-178 .
Thompson , A. , Timmers , E. , Kenter , M.J. , Kraakman , M.E .
, Hendriks , R.W .
and Schuurman , R.K. ( 1992 ) Eur : J .
Immunol .
, 22 , 3167-3171 .
Kim , K.J .
, Kanellopoulos Langevin , C. , Merwin , R.M .
, Sachs , D.H. and Asofsky , R. ( 1979 ) J .
Immunol .
, 122 , 549-554 .
Martin , D.J .
and Van Ness , B.G .
( 1989 ) Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
, 9 , 4560-4562 .
Nelms , K. , Hromas , R. and Van Ness , B. G. ( 1990 ) Nucleic Acids Res .
, 18 , 1037-1043 .
Dignam , J.D .
, Lebovitz , R.M .
and Roeder , R.G .
( 1983 ) Nucleic Acids Res .
, 11 , 1475-1489 .
Fulton , R. and Van Ness , B.G .
( 1993 ) Nucleic Acids Res .
, 21 , 4941-4947 .
Fulton , R. and Van Ness , B.G .
( 1994 ) Nucleic Acids Res .
, 22 , 4216-4223 .
Schwartz , O. , Virelizier , J.L .
, Montagnier , L. and Hazan , U .
( 1990 ) Gene , 88 , 197-205 .
Fulton , R. and Van Ness , B.G .
( 1993 ) Biotechniques , 14 , 762-763 .
Martin , D.J .
and Van Ness , B.G .
( 1990 ) Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
, 10 , 1950-1958 .
Nelms , K. and Van Ness , B.G .
( 1990 ) Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
, 10 , 3843-3846 .
Atchison , ML .
, Delmas , V. , and Perry , RP .
( 1990 ) EMBO J. , 9 , 3109-3117 .
Picrani , A. , Heguy , A. , Fujii , H. and Roeder , R.G ( 1990 ) Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
, 10 , 6204-6215 .
Parslow , T.G .
, Blair , D.L .
, Murphy , W.J .
and Granner , D.K .
( 1984 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA , $ 1 , 2650-2654 .
Falkner , FG .
and Zachau , G.H .
( 1984 ) Nature , 310 , 71-74 .
Currie , R.A. and Roeder , R.G .
( 1989 ) Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
, 9 , 4239-4247 .
Baumruker , T. , Sturm , R. and Herr , W. ( 1988 ) Genes Dev .
, 2 , 1400-1413 .
Eaton , S. and Calame , K. ( 1987 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA , 84 , 7634-7638 .
Thevenin , C. , Lucas , B.P .
, Kozlow , E.J .
and Kehrl , J.H .
( 1993 ) J. Biol .
Chem .
268 , 5949-5956 .
Corcoran , L.M .
, Karvelas , M. , Nossal , G.J .
, Ye , Z. S. , Jacks , T. and Baltimore , D. ( 1993 ) Genes Dev .
, 7 , 570-582 .
Atchison , ML .
and Perry , RP .
( 1986 ) Cell , 46 , 253-262 .
Meyer , K.B .
, Sharpe , M.J. , Surani , M.A .
and Neuberger , M.S .
( 1990 ) Nucleic Acids Res .
, 18 , 5609-5615 .
Pongubala , J.M .
and Atchison , ML .
( 1991 ) Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
, 11 , 1040-1047 .
Hiramatsu , R. , Akagi , K. , Matsuoka , M. , Sakumi , K. , Nakamura , H. , Kingsbury , L. , David , C. , Hardy , RR .
, Yamamura , K. and Sakano , H. ( 1995 ) Cell , 83 , 1113-1123 .
Goodhardt , M. , Cavelier , P. , Akimenko , M.A .
, Lutfalla , G. , Babinet , C. and Rougeon , E ( 1987 ) Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 84 , 4229-4233 .
Radomska , H.S .
, Shen , C-P. , Kadesch , T. and Eckhardt , L.A. ( 1994 ) Immunity , 1 , 623-634 .
