MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOLOGY , Mar .
1997 , p. 1387-1395 0270-7306/97/ $ 04.00+0 Copyright © 1997 , American Society for Microbiology Vol .
17 , No .
3 Transcriptional Regulation of the Ferritin Heavy-Chain Gene : the Activity of the CCAAT Binding Factor NF-Y Is Modulated in Heme-Treated Friend Leukemia Cells and during Monocyte-to-Macrophage Differentiation G. MARZIALI , * E. PERROTTI , * R. ILARI , * U. TESTA , * E. M. COCCIA , ' anp A. BATTISTINE'* Laboratory of Virology and Hematology and Oncology , `` Istituto Superiore di Sanita , 00161 Rome , Italy Received 10 October 1996/Returned for modification 14 November 1996/Accepted 11 December 1996 The ferritin H-chain gene promoter regulation was analyzed in heme-treated Friend leukemia cells ( FLCs ) and during monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation .
In the majority of cell lines studied , the regulation of ferritin expression was exerted mostly at the translational level .
However , in differentiating erythroid cells , which must incorporate high levels of iron to sustain hemoglobin synthesis , and in macrophages , which are involved in iron storage , transcriptional regulation seemed to be a relevant mechanism .
We show here that the minimum region of the ferritin H-gene promoter that is able to confer transcriptional regulation by heme in FLCs to a reporter gene is 77 nucleotides upstream of the TATA box .
This cis element binds a protein complex referred to as HRF ( heme-responsive factor ) , which is greatly enhanced both in heme-treated FLCs and during monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation .
The CCAAT element present in reverse orientation in this promoter region of the ferritin H-chain gene is necessary for binding and for gene activity , since a single point mutation is able to abolish the binding of HRF and the transcriptional activity in transfected cells .
By competition experiments and supershift assays , we identified the induced HRF as containing at least the ubiquitous transcription factor NF-Y .
NF-Y is formed by three subunits , A , B , and C , all of which are necessary for DNA binding .
Cotransfection with a transdominant negative mutant of the NF-YA subunit abolishes the transcriptional activation by heme , indicating that NF-Y plays an essential role in this activation .
We have also observed a differential expression of the NF-YA subunit in heme-treated and control FLCs and during monocyte-to- macrophage differentiation .
Ferritin is a ubiquitous intracellular iron storage protein , whose major role is to sequester and then detoxify intracellular iron that has not been otherwise utilized in cellular metabolism ( 38 , 44 ) .
Iron is an essential constituent of some proteins , enzymes , and cofactors , and the regulation of its metabolism and homeostasis is an essential feature of living organisms .
This homeostasis is maintained by the coordinate regulation of iron uptake via the transferrin receptor and iron sequestration by ferritin , within a hollow protein shell formed by subunits of two types , H and L. The H and L chains are found associated in various ratios , giving rise to a wide range of isoforms depending on the physiological conditions and the type of tissue ( 1 ) .
H-chain-rich ferritin accumulates and releases iron faster than L-chain-rich ferritin does ( 45 ) and predominates in erythropoietic tissues ; the L subunit is better suited for long-term iron storage and accumulates in the liver and spleen ( 5 ) .
Intracellular iron is the master regulator of ferritin biosynthesis and accumulation .
Extensive studies have shown that this regulation is mostly exerted posttranscriptionally by specific mRNA-protein interactions between the iron-regulatory proteins and the iron-responsive elements contained in the 5 untranslated region of the ferritin mRNA ( 26 , 27 ) .
This translational control is probably the best-characterized level of regulation of ferritin synthesis in the majority of cell types studied .
In contrast , the mechanisms and the frans-activating factor ( s ) by which ferritin transcription is regulated , in terms of either * Corresponding author .
Mailing address : Laboratory of Virology , Istituto Superiore di Sanita , Viale Regina Elena , 299 , 00161 Rome , Italy .
Phone : ( 396 ) 49903266 .
Fax : ( 396 ) 49902082 .
E-mail : BATTIST @ VIRUS1.ISS.INFN.IT .
1387 basal expression , induction , or tissue-specific expression are poorly understood .
Coulson and Cleveland ( 12 ) reported a transcription-dependent increase of ferritin mRNA levels in Chinese hamster ovary cells exposed to hemin .
It has also been shown that iron acts at the transcriptional level to modulate the expression of the ferritin L gene in HeLa cells and hepatocytes without affecting the expression of the H gene ( 6 , 46 ) .
Furthermore , tumor necrosis factor alpha and interleukin-1 selectively increase the ferritin H mRNA level in a variety of mes-enchymal cell lines through a transcriptional mechanism ( 28 ) .
We have previously shown that in Friend leukemia cells ( FLCs ) , transcriptional control is a relevant mechanism for the regulation of ferritin expression by heme ( 9-11 ) .
Heme ( iron-protoporphyrin ) is the prosthetic group of hemoproteins such as hemoglobin , catalase , and the cytochromes .
As a prosthetic group , heme can regulate both the structure and the activity of hemoproteins , and it has been shown to function as an effector molecule that can regulate many biological processes including transcription , translation , transport , assembly , and protein degradation .
It also plays an important role in cellular differentiation and maturation processes , and a significant amount of information is available on the role of hemin in the differentiation of the erythropoietic system ( for a review , see reference 35 ) .
FLCs are erythroid precursors blocked in their differentiation pathway at the proerythroblastic stage .
These cells can be induced to differentiate by treatment with several compounds ( for a review , see reference 37 ) and thus represent an optimal cell culture model system for the study of the molecular mechanisms involved in regulation of ferritin expression in erythroid cells .
An increase in ferritin accumulation accompanied by a 1388 MARZIALI ET AL .
pronounced increase in ferritin mRNA content ( 43 ) has also been observed during differentiation of monocytes to macrophages , the cell type mostly involved in iron storage .
In this study , we analyzed the transcriptional regulation of the ferritin H-gene promoter in heme-treated FLCs and identified a minimum region of 77 nucleotides upstream of the TATA box , sufficient to confer a high level of expression to a reporter gene .
This region contains a CCAAT box in reverse orientation and two Sp1 binding sites .
Specific mutations in the CCAAT box are able to abolish both the formation of the complex and the transcriptional activity .
Supershift experiments with specific antibodies in heme-treated FLCs show that the activity of the ferritin H-gene promoter fragment is associated with the formation of a complex which contains the CCAAT binding factor NF-Y ( also known as CP1 and CBF ) ( 22 ) .
NF-Y is a heteromeric transcription factor , which binds specifically to the CCAAT motifs of a large number of gene promoters ( 8 , 15 , 24 , 34 , 36 ) .
It is formed from at least three subunits ( NF-YA , NF-YB , and NF-YC ) , all of which are necessary for DNA binding ( 13 , 25 , 42 ) .
The same factor ( s ) is present in extracts from macrophages , and its binding to the same element of the ferritin H-gene promoter significantly increases during the in vitro monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation .
Interestingly , NF-Y activity seems to be modulated during differentiation in that freshly isolated monocytes possess the NF-YB but not the NF-YA subunit and do not show detectable NF-Y activity as assessed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay ( EMSA ) .
In contrast , macrophages synthesize both NF-YA and NF-YB and exhibit increasing NF-Y binding activity during the differentiation process .
We also found an increase in NF-YA subunit but not in NF-YB subunit after heme treatment of FLCs .
Our data shed light on the mechanism of transcriptional regulation of the ferritin H-chain gene and indicate that NF-Y plays a major role in this regulation both in heme-treated FLCs and during monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation .
MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell cultures and treatments .
FLCs were grown in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 5 % fetal calf serum ( FCS ) and antibiotics .
F4-12B2 is a thymidine kinase-negative ( TK~ ) FLC clone ( kindly provided by W. Ostertag ) ( 18 ) which was grown in monolayers in minimal essential medium containing 10 % FCS and antibiotics .
NIH 3T3 cells were grown in Dulbecco modified Eagle medium supplemented with 10 % FCS and antibiotics .
The cells were treated for the indicated times with 100 wM hemin ( Porphyrin Products Inc. , Logan , Utah ) .
Hemin stock solution was prepared by dissolving the powder in 0.5 M NaOH followed by buffering at pH 7.4 with Tris .
The concentration was evaluated spectrophotometrically at 409 nm in pyridine solution ( ¢ = 0.163 ) .
Isolation and culture of monocytes/macrophages .
Peripheral blood mononu-clear cells were obtained from 18- to 40-year-old healthy male and female donors and cultivated as previously described ( 43 ) .
Briefly , 1.5 X 10 `` total cells were seeded in 75-cm > culture flasks in Iscove 's medium containing 15 % FCS ( filtered through a 0.22-pm-pore-size filter ) .
After 1 h at 37°C , the adherent cells ( 96 % CD14* ) were extensively washed with medium to remove nonadherent cells , replaced with fresh medium , and cultured at 37°C .
All the reagents used for monocyte isolation and culture were endotoxin free , as evaluated by the Limulus amebocyte lysate assay ( pbi International , Milan , Italy ) .
On various culture days , both nonadherent and adherent cells were recovered and analyzed .
Adherent macrophages were recovered with a cell scraper after 60 min of incubation at 4°C in the presence of Ca*- and Mg**-free phosphate-buffered saline ( Flow Lab-oratories ) .
This procedure did not affect cell viability , and both adherent and nonadherent cells terminally differentiated to macrophages .
Nonadherent and adherent cells were mixed and then processed for preparation of whole-cell or nuclear extracts .
Preparation of whole-cell and nuclear extracts .
Cells ( 3 X 10 `` ) were washed twice in cold phosphate-buffered saline and then collected by centrifugation .
The pellet was resuspended in 300 pl of lysis buffer containing 20 mM HEPES , 50 mM NaCl , 10 mM EDTA , 2 mM EGTA , and 0.5 % ( vol/vol ) Nonidet P-40 ( pH 8 ) supplemented with 0.5 mM dithiothreitol , 10 mM sodium molybdate , 10 mM sodium orthovanadate , 100 mM NaF , 10 ug of leupeptin per ml , and 0.5 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride ( PMSF ) .
After incubation for 30 min on ice , the Mor .
CELL .
BioL .
suspension was centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 10 min .
The supernatants were aliquoted and stored at -80°C .
To prepare the nuclear exctracts , the cells were lysated in 500 pl of lysis buffer ( 10 mM Tris [ pH 7.4 ] , 10 mM NaCl , 3 mM MgCl , 0.5 % [ vol/vol ] Nonidet P-40 ) complemented with 0.5 mM PMSF , 10 ug of leupeptin per ml , 2 ug of pepstatin per ml , and 50 mM NaF , layered on top of 4 ml of sucrose buffer ( 24 % [ wt/vol ] sucrose ) , and centrifuged at 1,300 X g for 10 min at 4°C .
The nuclei were resuspended in 30 pl of 20 mM Tris ( pH 7.6-20 mM KCl-0.2 mM EDTA-1.5 mM MgC1 , -25 % ( vol/vol ) glycerol-5 mM 2-mercaptocethanol supplemented with 0.5 mM PMSF , 10 pg of leupeptin per ml , 2 pg of pepstatin per ml , and 50 mM NaF ; 120 pl of the same buffer containing 600 mM KCI was then added , and the mixture was incubated for 20 min on ice and then centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 15 min .
The supernatants were dialyzed for 6 h against the same buffer containing 80 mM KCI and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C .
Plasmids and mutagenesis .
The -160-bp construct , LSCAT plasmid , containing the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase ( CAT ) gene under the control of the human ferritin H-chain promoter , has been described previously ( 20 , 21 ) .
To generate the construct -77 bp , the LSCAT plasmid was digested with SeclI and Aval to excise nucleotides ( nt ) -78 to -160 and religated .
The plasmid carrying the mutated CCAAT box ( -77-bp MUT ) was prepared by PCR amplification with the wild-type -77 bp as a template .
Two primers were used to amplify this DNA ; the one carrying the mutation ( GGCTCGGGGCG GGCGGCGCTGATCGGCCGGGGCGGG ) was located at the 5 ' end of the ferritin H promoter , and the other was located at the farthest 3 ' end region of the CAT cDNA .
The amplified fragment was gel purified , subjected to Klenow fragment and kinase treatment ( 19 ) , and ligated in plasmid pUC19 .
The nucle-otide sequence of each deleted or mutated region was confirmed by the dideoxy DNA sequencing procedure with the Sequenase kit ( U.S. Biochemical Corp. ) .
Preparation of probes for the binding assay .
To generate the probes for EMSA , the LSCAT plasmid was digested with Secl and Bgl to obtain probe A , with Secl and Avel to obtain probe B , and with Avel and BemHI to obtain fragment C. The DNA fragments , prepared by digestion with the appropriate restriction enzymes , were gel purified and blunt ended by the filling-in reaction with Klenow or T4 DNA polymerase .
DNA EMSA .
To measure the association of DNA binding proteins with different DNA sequences , the ferritin H-chain promoter fragments and the synthetic double-stranded oligonucleotides , prepared on an Applied Biosystems DNA synthesizer , were end labeled with [ y-*°P ] ATP by using T4 polynucleotide kinase .
The binding-reaction mixture ( 20-pl final volume ) contained labeled oligonucleotide probes ( 10,000 cpm ) in binding buffer ( 75 mM KCI , 20 mM Tris-HCl [ pH 7.5 ] , 1 mM dithiothreitol ) containing 5 g of bovine serum albumin per ml , 14 % ( vol/vol ) glycerol , and 3 ag of poly ( dI-dC ) .
Total-cell lysates ( 10 pg ) or nuclear extracts ( 5 pg ) were added , and the reaction mixture was incubated for 20 min at room temperature .
Samples were electrophoresed in a 6 % poly-acrylamide gel in 0.5 % Tris-borate-EDTA ( TBE ) buffer for 2 h at 200 V at 18°C .
The gels were then dried and subjected to autoradiography .
Competition studies were performed by adding unlabeled double-stranded oligonucleotides at a 100-fold molar excess over the labeled probe .
The DNA sequences of the oligonucleotides used are indicated in Table 1 .
For supershift analysis , total-cell extracts were incubated with 3 pg of anti-Sp1 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc. ) or 1 ug of anti-NF-YA or anti-NF-YB antibody ( a generous gift from D. Mathis , C. Benoist , and R. Mantovani ) ( 31 ) simultaneously with the addition of binding buffer containing labeled oligonucleotide .
After a 1-h incubation on ice , the samples were subjected to electrophoresis as described above .
Western blot assay .
For Western blot analysis , 60-ug samples of whole-cell extracts were denatured and separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacryl-amide gel electrophoresis ( 10 % polyacrylamide ) .
Proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose paper , incubated with rabbit anti NF-YA or NF-YB , and detected by the enhanced chemiluminescence system with anti-rabbit horseradish perox-idase-coupled secondary antibody ( Amersham ) .
Incubation and washes were carried out as described by Mantovani et al .
( 31 ) .
Transfection of F4-12B2 cells .
Cells ( 10 `` ) were grown in 150-mm culture dishes for 18 h. The culture medium was then replaced with 30 ml of fresh medium 4 h prior to the addition of 60 pg of calcium phosphate-precipitated -77-bp-CAT or -160-bp-CAT constructs ( 47 ) .
At 12 h posttransfection , the cells were split to standardize the transfection efficiency and the growth medium was replaced , and 6 h later the cells were treated with 100 M hemin for 24 h. The same procedure was used in transfection experiments with the -77-bp-CAT ( wt ) and the -77-bp-mut-CAT constructs .
For cotransfection experiments , 40 g of reporter plasmid -77-bp-CAT ( or its mutant -77-bp-mut-CAT ) , 20 ug of a NF-YA dominant negative plasmid YA13 m29 ( kindly provided by R. Mantovani ) ( 32 ) , and 5 pg of the test plasmid pCH110 B-gal , used as an internal control of transfection efficiency , were used .
When necessary an equal amount of pGL2 vector plasmid was used for trans-fections to equalize the total amount of plasmid DNA .
After 12 h , the cells were treated with hemin and processed for RNase protection experiments ( see below ) .
RNase protection experiments .
Total RNA was isolated from transfected cells by the guanidium cesium chloride method ( 17 ) and treated with DNase .
Total RNA ( 20 ug ) was hybridized for 18 h to the RNA probes ( 3 X 10° cpm ) at 55°C in 25 ul of 80 % formamide-0.4 M NaCl-40 mM piperazine-N , N'-bis ( 2-ethane-sulfonic acid ) ( PIPES ; pH 6.8 ) -1 mM EDTA .
Subsequently , samples were incubated with RNase A ( 40 pg/ml ! )
and RNase T , ( 1 g/m ! )
for 1 h at 33°C and then Vor .
17 , 1997 NF-Y AND FERRITIN H-CHAIN GENE TRANSCRIPTION - 1389 TABLE 1 .
Sequences of oligonucleotides used as probes or competitors in EMSA Oligonucleotide Sequences `` $ 53,511 ?
FF + FFmut ___ === kkk kkk eek eke kk kkk G ... ... ... ... .
AT s I ee ATT ... .
+ EE GGGCGGCGCTGATTGGCCGGGGCGGGCCTGA + Spl ATTCGATCGGGGCGGSCGCcGacc cEBP/8 TGCAGATTGCACAATCTGCA NF I TTTGGCTTGAAGCCAATATGAG « -Globin CAAGCACAAACCAGCCAATGAGTAACTGCTCCAAGGGCGTGTCCACCCTGCC + B-Globin GGATCCTAGGGTTGGCCAATCTACTCCCAGGAGCTT + CP2 GCCCTAACAAGTTTTACTGGGTAGAGCAAGCACAAACCAGCCAATGAGTA MuCP1° GATCGCACAAACCAGCCAATGAGTAACTGCTCCAAG + HuCP1° AGCTCAAATTAACCAATCAGCGCACTCTCACAGGAGCT + `` A dot indicates no changes from the FF sequence .
Boldface type indicates the CCAAT box in the direct or inverted orientation .
Underlining indicates Sp1 consensus binding sites .
* Data from Fig .
4 and 6 .
+ , competition ; + , reduced competition ; - , no competition .
° The sequences are derived from the murine ( Mu ) or human ( Hu ) « -globin gene promoter .
subjected to proteinase K digestion , phenol-chloroform extraction , and ethanol precipitation .
Gel electrophoresis was performed on a standard 8 % polyacryl-amide-8 M urea sequencing gel .
Construction of the pCAT riboprobe has been described previously ( 9 ) .
To generate a *°P-labeled 153-nt antisense RNA probe , the pCAT riboprobe was linearized with Scel and transcribed with SP6 polymerase .
The 434-bp pTRI-GaPDH mouse antisense control template ( Ambion , Austin , Tex . )
was used as an internal standard to establish the relative amount of RNA loaded .
The probe was synthesized by in vitro transcription from the linear template with SP6 polymerase .
RESULTS Analysis of the frans-activating factor ( s ) binding to the proximal region of the ferritin H-gene promoter in heme-treated FLCs .
We have previously shown that the treatment of FLCs with heme results in 10- to 15-fold ferritin H-chain mRNA accumulation whereas the same treatment of fibroblastic cell lines gives no appreciable variation in the steady-state level of the ferritin mRNA .
This accumulation reflects an increase in the rate of transcription of the ferritin H-chain gene dependent upon a 160-bp segment upstream from the transcription start site of the ferritin H-gene promoter ( 9 ) .
To analyze this region of the ferritin H-chain gene promoter and the regulatory factors able to bind it , both EMSA and transient-transfection experiments were performed .
Three radiolabeled probes designated A ( -37 to -160 ; representing approximately the -160-bp promoter devoid of the TATA box-surrounding sequences ) , B ( -86 to -160 ) , and C ( +1 to -77 ) , prepared as described in Materials and Methods , were incubated with nuclear extracts from FLCs and NIH 3T3 cells treated with either control medium or 100 M hemin for 1 h. The complexes formed were resolved by PAGE ( Fig .
1 ) .
Only constitutive DNA-protein complexes were formed with portion B of the -160-bp region of the ferritin promoter .
Conversely , when fragments A and C were used as probes , the formation of one DNA-protein complex ( indicated by an ar-row ) , whose level was enhanced in cell extract from heme-treated FLCs , was observed .
The enhanced complex , referred to throughout as heme-responsive factor ( HRF ) , starts to appear 30 min after the heme addition and lasts for several hours ( results not shown ) .
The same results were obtained with whole-cell extracts ( results not shown ) .
A parallel analysis with cell extracts from the NIH 3T3 fibroblast cell line ( Fig .
1 ) incubated with the same three probes shows the formation of DNA-protein complexes , but none of them appears to be enhanced by the heme treatment .
This result is in line with the lack of an increased steady-state level of the ferritin mRNA observed after heme treatment of NIH 3T3 cells ( results not shown ) .
To determine the functional significance in vivo of the -77-bp fragment ( C ) of the ferritin H-chain gene promoter in the transcriptional activation by heme , a construct containing this promoter fragment linked to the CAT reporter gene was transiently transfected in F4-12B2 , a TK FLC clone able to FLC NIH-373 Probes : A A B B c co Aa aA B B c C Hemin : -o t - 4+ - + -o # 0 - # - + ( 100 uM ) t a A boss _.H-~ “ J ‘ lud [ Z ) ann und bund toed ag § ; B `` i W e Probe A -160 -37 m -- -- 160 -86 m C F -- -- 77 +1 FIG .
1 .
Analysis of the proteic factors able to bind to proximal regions of the ferritin H-gene promoter in erythroid ( FLCs ) and fibroblastic ( NIH 3T3 ) cell lines .
Fragments A , B , and C , obtained by digestion of the -160-bp ferritin H-gene promoter with restriction enzymes ( see Materials and Methods ) , are depicted in the lower part of the figure .
Nuclear cell extracts from control cells and cells treated with 100 M hemin , were analyzed by EMSA ( see Materials and Methods ) .
The HRF is indicated by an arrow .
1390 MARZIALI ET AL .
-160 bp promoter CAT Human Ferritin H-chain promoter I TATAA AlgranaanyAaa -160 it Scal ~77 bp promoter < -- ] 153 nt riboprobe f TATA A /////// , ///AUGV\/\Mf\|f\-/\ 97 +1 Scal 160bp 77 bp om imum Hemin ( 100 uM ) _- + - + CAT -- * `` BEA 153 nt GAPDH -- » W @ @ @ mpawe @ nt 4340+ FIG .
2 .
The -77-bp segment of the proximal ferritin H-gene promoter is sufficient to increase reporter gene expression after heme treatment .
F4-12B2 cells were transiently transfected with a construct containing the -160-bp or the -77-bp ferritin H promoter fragment linked to the CAT reporter gene .
After transfection , cells were split and then treated for 24 h with medium alone or 100 pM hemin .
RNA was then extracted and analyzed by RNase protection using specific riboprobes for CAT ( see Materials and Methods ) .
GAPDH riboprobe was used as an internal control .
grow in monolayer ( Fig .
2 ) .
After transfection , the cells were split to standardize the transfection efficiency and treated for 24 h with control medium or 100 wM hemin .
RNA was then extracted and analyzed by RNase protection with a specific riboprobe for CAT .
The glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydro-genase ( GAPDH ) riboprobe was used as an internal control .
The results ( Fig .
2 ) indicate that the expression of the -77-bp fragment construct was stimulated by the heme treatment to the same extent as was the expression of the entire -160-bp fragment construct , confirming that the -77-bp fragment is sufficient for the transcriptional activation by heme .
Analysis of sequences required for the binding of the HRF .
The minimal sequence required for the binding of the HRF was identified by using double-stranded oligonucleotides spanning different internal regions of the -77-bp fragment ( probe C ) as specific competitors in EMSA .
Fragment FF , spanning nt -42 to -77 , was able to specifically compete for the binding of HRF , whereas oligonucleotides spanning either -27 to -46 ( FC ) or -29 to +1 ( FD ) did not affect the binding ( Fig .
3A ) .
The sequence of the FF region ( Table 1 ) shows a CCAAT box in reverse orientation ( in boldface type ) surrounded by two Sp1 consensus binding sites ( underlined ) .
To determine the relative significance of these two elements for the binding of HRF to the FF fragment , specific competitions and supershift assays were performed .
As shown in Fig .
3B , the binding of HRF to FF was not specifically competed by the consensus sequence for Sp1 , nor were specific anti-Sp1 antibodies able to supershift the complex .
These results suggest that HRF does not contain Spl protein ; control EMSA with the radiolabeled Sp1 probe showed that the FF sequence was not able to compete for the specific binding of Sp1 to its consensus binding site .
In line with these data , oligonucleotide 4T , which represents the FF mutated in the two Sp1 consensus sites , was able to compete for binding .
Similar results ( not shown ) were obtained when the same competitions were performed in EMSA analysis with a longer oligonucleotide ( from nt -91 to -25 ) as the probe .
In this probe , the Sp1 sites were not as close to the end as in the FF probe .
Mor .
CELL .
BioL .
Competitors : - FF FC FD Hemin alle anne 0 ( 100 pM ) FF = -- -- -- 4 A ﬂ ﬂ. lm ( & _ FD ~46 -27 -29 +1 a ) £ ) $ a s RRE Ta T. & woot Competitors : - 3 ) `` £ ) F Abani sprig 7 | bug 5 _ w - HD- HP Wwe t F & L J L_ ' Probes FF SP1 FIG .
3 .
A minimal fragment ( FF ) of the -77-bp segment of the ferritin H gene promoter is sufficient for the binding of HRF .
( A ) Whole-cell extracts from FLCs treated with 100 M hemin were incubated with the C labeled probe and analyzed by EMSA .
A 100-fold molar excess of unlabeled oligonucleotides FF , FC , and FD , spanning different internal region of the C probe ( depicted in the figure ) , was added where indicated .
( B ) Whole-cell extracts from hemin-treated FLCs were incubated with end-labeled FF probe in the absence ( - ) or presence of a 100-fold molar excess of the indicated oligonucleotides and analyzed by EMSA .
Polyclonal anti-Sp1 antibodies ( Ab ) were added where indicated .
For Sp1 specificity , a double-stranded oligonucleotide containing the specific binding sites for Sp1 was also used as a probe .
The sequences of the used oligonucleotides are indicated in Table 1 .
In contrast , the FF oligonucleotide containing a mutation ( FF mut ) of the central CCAAT residue ( CCGAT ) , known to be critical for CCAAT factor binding ( 8 ) , was not able to abolish the binding activity of HRF to FF .
The transcriptional activity of the -77-bp fragment is dependent on the presence of a functional CCAAT box .
To determine the functional significance of the CCAAT element in the activation of ferritin transcription by heme in vivo , the point mutation in the CCAAT residue ( CCGAT ) able to abolish its binding activity in vitro was introduced into the construct containing the -77-bp promoter fragment .
The mutant and the wild-type promoters , linked to the CAT reporter gene , were transiently transfected in the F4-12B2 FLC clone .
After 24 h of 100 M hemin or control medium treatment , CAT mRNA expression was assayed by RNase protection .
As shown in Fig .
4 , the expression of CAT mRNA resulting from the mutant promoter was reduced to background levels , indicating that the binding of the CCAAT factor is necessary for activity of ferritin gene promoter in response to heme treatment of FLCs .
Sequence specificity of the HRF .
To test whether the FF fragment ( -42 to -77 ) of the ferritin promoter can bind proteins that have been described to interact with the CCAAT motif , specific DNA sequences were used for competition stud-ies .
As shown in Fig .
5A , the binding of HRF was specifically competed for by a CCAAT oligonucleotide from the murine « -globin gene promoter ( lane « glob ) and to a lesser extent , by a CCAAT oligonucleotide from the human -globin gene promoter ( lane B glob ) .
In contrast , oligonucleotides containing the c-EBP/B or the NF-I consensus sequence were unable to compete for the binding .
The sequence of the CCAAT oligonucleotide from murine « -globin gene promoter , indicated in Table 1 , contains binding Vor .
17 , 1997 Mut _- WT Hemin ( 100 uM ) : _- + - + CAT _- » « ~ > @ -153 nt GaPDH -434nt FIG .
4 .
The transcriptional activity of the -77-bp fragment is dependent on the presence of a functional CCAAT box .
F4-12B2 cells were transiently transfected with the -77-bp promoter fragment and with the same construct mutated in the CCAAT box ( CCGAT ) .
Transfected cells were treated with medium alone or with 100 M hemin for 24 h , and RNA was extracted and analyzed by RNase protection with specific riboprobe for CAT .
GAPDH riboprobe was used as an internal control .
Mut , mutant ; WT , wild type .
sites for an Sp1-like factor , for CP1 ( 24 ) ( also known as CBF or NF-Y [ 22 ] ) , and for CP2 ( 30 ) .
Competition experiments with highly specific oligonucleotides for CP2- and CP1-binding sites ( Fig .
5A ) indicate that consensus sequences specific for CP1 , as well as the CP1 consensus sequence present on FF ( oligo EE ) , were able to specifically compete for the HRF a ~~~ & S g a 2 a a a. E m ~ 2 % 9 9 Y u n 3 Competitors : - k 3G & @ 8 ko E P € wow ‘ * ‘ ¥ ® * wa 5 .
‘ Probes FF HuCP1 m-Ab anti NF- YA : oe Ab anti NF-YB : -o g o- o- $ o-tin « - @ * dialh f las - wag FIG .
5 .
HRF contains the NF-Y transcription factors .
( A ) Whole-cell extracts from hemin-treated FLCs were incubated with an FF radiolabeled probe .
Competition assays were performed with a 100-fold molar excess of unlabeled oligonucleotides containing the consensus binding sites for cEBP/B , NF-I , and CCAAT oligonucleotides from the human B-globin ( B glob ) and from the murine « -globin gene promoter ( « glob ) .
Additional competition assays were performed with consensus binding sites for HuCP2 , HuCP1 , MuCP1 , EE , and 4T oligonucleotides ( for sequences , see Table 1 ) .
( B ) Whole-cell extracts from hemin-treated FLCs were incubated with the FF or the « -globin gene promoter-derived CP1 probes in the absence or presence of polyclonal anti NF-YB serum antibodies or monoclonal anti-NF-YA antibodies ( Ab ) where indicated .
NF-Y AND FERRITIN H-CHAIN GENE TRANSCRIPTION - 1391 Probes FF - HuCP1 SP1 Hemin =o o $ 0 - $ 00 - + ( 100pM ) a “ q “ MW “ FIG .
6 .
SP1 binding activity is not modulated in heme-treated FLCs .
Whole-cell extracts from FLCs untreated or treated for 1 h with 100 wM hemin were incubated with end-labelled FF , HuCP1 , and SP1 double-stranded oligonucleotides as probes and analyzed by EMSA .
binding to FF .
Meanwhile sequences comprising the binding site for CP2 were ineffective in competing for the binding activity .
To assess if HRF , whose induction by heme correlates with enhanced transcription activity of the ferritin proximal promoter , comprises CP1 ( CBF/NF-Y ) protein , supershift experiments with specific antibodies were performed .
EMSA analysis after incubation of total-cell extracts with antibodies able to specifically recognize either subunit A or B of NF-Y ( 31 ) showed that both antibodies were able to abolish and/or supershift the FF protein complex ( Fig .
5B ) .
NF-Y protein is a constitutive transcription factor ; to test if another constitutive transcription factor such as Sp1 is modulated by the heme treatment , control experiments with Sp1 probe were performed .
Results shown in Fig .
6 indicate that heme treatment is able to increase the binding of NF-Y to the FF and HuCP1 probes whereas no variation in Spl binding to its specific consensus sequence was observed .
Transfection of a dominant negative analog of NF-YA inhibits the heme-induced ferritin transcription .
The functional significance of NF-YA subunit expression in the activation of ferritin transcription by heme in vivo was tested by cotrans-fecting F4-12B2 cells with the -77-bp promoter fragment together with an NF-YA dominant negative mutant ( 32 ) before the heme treatment .
This NF-YA mutant acts as a dominant repressor of NF-Y/DNA complex formation and NF-Y-depen-dent transcription by sequestering the NF-YB subunit in defective complexes that are no longer able to bind the DNA .
As shown in Fig .
7 , the heme-induced transcription of the -77-bp ferritin promoter ( lane 2 ) was completely abolished when the transdominant negative mutant of NF-YA was cotransfected ( lane 4 ) .
As control for transfection efficiency , the expression plasmid pCH110 B-gal , cotransfected with all the constructs , gave equivalent expression of B-galactosidase in all samples ( results not shown ) .
NF-Y is induced during the in vitro monocyte-macrophage maturation .
The ferritin H gene is ubiquitously expressed but is up-regulated during both erythroid ( 11 ) and monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation ( 43 ) .
To investigate the ferritin promoter regulation in monocytes/macrophages , a double-stranded oligonucleotide corresponding to the FF ( -42 to -77 ) fragment of the ferritin H-gene promoter was used in EMSA with extracts from monocytes/macrophages on days 0 , 3 , and 7 of culture .
Freshly isolated monocytes ( day 0 ) do not show any nuclear protein able to complex with the FF fragment of the ferritin H-gene promoter .
Starting at day 3 , and maximally at day 7 of culture , one major activity appears which binds specifically to this region of the ferritin H-gene promoter ( Fig .
8A ) .
This complex shows identical electrophoretical mobility to that present in cell extracts from FLCs .
To test the speci- 1392 MARZIALI ET AL .
7+bp YA13m29 Hemin : =- 4 O- + ( 100 pM ) CAT -- - .
-153 nt GaPDH - » -134nt 1° 2 B3 4 FIG .
7 .
Cotransfection of a dominant negative mutant of NF-YA ( YA13m29 ) inhibits the heme-induced transcriptional activity of the -77-bp ferritin H promoter .
F4-12B2 cells were transiently transfected with -77-bp ferritin H gene promoter CAT construct ( lanes 1 and 2 ) or cotransfected with the same construct together with 20 ug of the dominant negative mutant of NF-YA YA13m29 plasmid ( lanes 3 and 4 ) .
After transfection , cells were treated with medium alone or with 100 wM hemin for 24 h , and RNA was extracted and analyzed by RNase protection with a specific riboprobe for CAT .
GAPDH riboprobe was used as an internal control .
ficity of the complex , competition experiments were performed with the same oligonucleotides that were utilized for the experiment shown in Fig .
5A with FLC extracts .
In Fig .
8B , the most significant competitions are shown .
The binding of the complex at day 7 of cultures is specifically competed for by a CCAAT oligonucleotide from the murine « -globin gene promoter and to a lesser extent by the CCAAT oligonucleotide from the human -globin gene promoter .
Moreover , the CP1 consensus sequence totally competes for the binding as well as oligonucleotides EE ( derived from the FF sequence and containing only the consensus sequence for CP-1 ) and 4T ( FF oligonucleotide in which both the Sp1 sites were mutated ) .
Conversely , sequences comprising binding sites for Spl , cEBP/B , NF I , and the oligonucleotide containing the G mutation in the central CCAAT box are not effective ( results not shown ) .
These results and supershift experiments with specific NF-Y antibodies ( results not shown ) strongly suggest that the activity of the same CCAAT binding factor , NF-Y , is stimulated in heme-treated erythroid cells as well as during the in vitro monocyte-to-macrophage maturation .
NF-YA subunit expression is modulated during monocyte-macrophage maturation and in heme-treated FLCs .
To test whether the induction of NF-Y binding activity observed during monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation and after heme treatment of FLCs could be related to differences in the synthesis and/or availability of one of the components of NF-Y , we evaluated the expression of both NF-YA and NF-YB subunits .
Western blot analysis showed that the NF-YB subunit ( Fig .
9 ) is equally strongly expressed in freshly isolated ( day 0 ) , maturing ( day 3 ) , and fully differentiated ( day 7 ) macrophages .
Similarly , control and heme-treated FLCs and NIH 3T3 cells showed comparable amounts of NF-YB .
Conversely , the NF-YA subunit ( Fig .
9 ) is undetectable in freshly isolated monocytes , starts to appear on day 3 , and further increases on day 7 of culture .
An increase in the NF-YA subunit amount was also observed after heme treatment of FLCs .
When cell exctracts from the fibroblastic cell line NIH 3T3 were exam-ined , no modulation of the NF-YA subunit was observed .
These results are in line with the DNA binding activity of NF-Y shown in Fig .
1 and 8 .
In fact , the lack of NF-YA in freshly isolated monocytes could account for the absence of the Mor .
CELL .
BioL .
Human A FLC Macrophages Hemin 0 3 7 - day TMT I C `` w ” .
E'-9 § s 2 aglob us w ote n | ee u t Human Macrophages ( day 7 ) FIG .
8 .
The binding of NF-Y to the minimal ferritin H gene promoter increases during monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation .
( A ) Whole-cell extracts obtained from human primary monocytes on days 0 , 3 , and 7 of culture were incubated with the FF probe and assayed by EMSA .
Whole-cell extracts from FLCs were used as a control .
The same complex , identified in FLCs , appears to bind to FF starting on day 3 of culture .
( B ) Competition assays were performed with a 100-fold molar excess of the indicated unlabelled oligonucleotides corresponding to consensus sequences for the indicated CCAAT binding factors as shown in Fig .
5A .
NF-Y-DNA complex on day 0 , whereas low basal levels of NF- YA are observed in untreated FLCs where a DNA binding complex is present .
DISCUSSION In this study , we have analyzed the transcriptional regulation of the proximal region of the ferritin H-gene promoter and the transactivating factor ( s ) able to bind this region in heme-treated FLCs and during monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation .
Regulation of ferritin expression has been extensively studied , and the induction of ferritin biosynthesis and/or intracel- Vor .
17 , 1997 human macrophages NIH-3T3 FLC F -- - -- A -O-days i080 0 3 7 Hemin _ : ; =- - - o- $ - + NF-YA { == ‘ - gr me CC i- _ > -45 NF-YB — > ——— Tle | whith Anan Amate 20 1° 20 3 4 50 60 7 FIG .
9 .
NF-YB and NF-YA isoforms at the protein level .
Western blot analysis of whole-cell extracts from day 0 , 3 , and 7 cultures of monocytes and from NIH 3T3 cells and FLCs treated with control medium or 100 wM hemin , where indicated , was performed as indicated in Materials and Methods .
Samples ( 60 ug ) were probed with an affinity-purified antibody against NF-YB or against NF-YA .
The doublet which presumably corresponds to the long and short forms of NF-YA is indicated .
lular accumulation by iron is well documented for a variety of tissues and cultured cells ( 14 , 16 , 39 , 40 , 44 ) .
The translational control exerted by iron and heme is probably the best-characterized level of regulation .
However , additional control mechanisms have been suggested .
A small but significant iron-dependent increase in the level of ferritin mRNA has been observed in rat liver ( 46 ) , HeLa ( 6 ) , and K562 ( 33 ) cells .
This increase was substantially smaller than the increase in ferritin biosynthesis , reflecting the predominant role of translational control in these cells .
In contrast , we showed that in FLCs , transcriptional control is a relevant mechanism for the regulation of ferritin expression both in differentiating and in non-differentiating cells ( 9-11 ) .
Similarly , a marked increase in both H- and L-ferritin mRNA levels is observed during monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation ( 43 ) .
Despite the extensive analysis and identification of the mechanisms and factors involved in the translational regulation , very little is known about the transcriptional regulation of ferritin gene expression .
We have previously identified ( 9 ) a 160-bp segment upstream from the transcription start site of the ferritin H gene that confers transcriptional regulation by heme to a reporter gene .
Here , we have extended the analysis of this segment of the ferritin H-gene promoter and identified a 77-bp sequence in the proximal region that is sufficient to confer the transcriptional regulation by heme to the reporter CAT gene when transiently transfected in FLCs .
By using EMSA , we have shown the formation of one major activity ( HRF ) which binds specifically to this region and whose level is significantly increased in cell extracts from heme-treated FLCs and during monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation .
A minimal region ( FF fragment from nt -77 to -42 ) is sufficient for the HRF binding .
The FF fragment contains two Sp1 consensus binding sites spanning a reverse CCAAT box .
Sp1 protein is apparently not involved in the formation of the complex with FF , as suggested by competition with Spl-specific oligonucleotides and by supershift experiments with specific anti-Sp1 antibodies ( Fig .
3B ) .
These data are also in line with the results of footprinting experiments published by Bevilacqua et al .
( 3 ) , showing a binding of Sp1 to the most distal consensus sequence ( from nt -109 to -132 ) of the ferritin promoter but NF-Y AND FERRITIN H-CHAIN GENE TRANSCRIPTION | 1393 no protection in the region of the ferritin H-gene promoter corresponding to our construct .
In contrast , we demonstrated that a point mutation in the reverse CCAAT box is able to abolish both the binding of the HRF and the transcriptional activation of the CAT reporter gene .
These results are consistent with the requirements for an intact CCAAT motif to sustain ferritin H-gene transcription by heme .
The relevance of this CCAAT box for the transcriptional activation of the ferritin H gene has also been demonstrated in differentiated Caco-2 cells , a human colon cell line able to differentiate into enterocyte-like cells ( 4 ) .
To date , a multiplicity of CCAAT box-binding activities have been identified , some of which are tissue specific whereas others are expressed ubiquitously ( 23 ) .
For both heme-treated FLC 's and monocyte/macrophage cells , the binding of HRF to the FF fragment is specifically competed for by a CCAAT oligonucleotide from the human « -globin gene promoter and partially by an oligonucleotide containing the CCAAT motif from the murine B-globin gene promoter but not by sequences comprising binding sites for other known CCAAT-binding factors such as NF-I and cEBP/B .
The a-globin-derived oligonucleotide contains a high-affinity binding site for CP1 protein , with an affinity that is at least five times higher than that of the B-globin oligonucleotide ( 8 ) .
Using specific antibodies ( 31 ) that recognize the A and B subunits of the NF-Y protein , we have demonstrated the presence of NF-Y in HRF ( Fig .
5B ) .
Furthermore , the NF-Y requirement for the heme-dependent stimulation of ferritin H-chain gene transcription was confirmed by transfection experiments with a transdominant repressor of NF-YA-DNA complex formation and NF-Y-depen-dent transcription ( Fig .
7 ) .
NF-Y is a ubiquitous and evolutionarily conserved heteromeric complex formed by at least three subunits ( A , B , and C ) , all of which are necessary for DNA binding ( 13 , 25 , 42 ) .
It binds specifically to the CCAAT motifs found in direct or inverted orientation in the 5 ' promoter region of a wide variety of genes ( 8 , 15 , 24 , 34 , 36 ) .
Although NF-Y is constitutive and ubiquitous , it also participates in the regulation of some promoters by controlling gene expression in a lineage- and acti-vation-specific manner ( e.g .
, albumin or class II major histocompatibility complex ) .
However , it remains to be proved whether NF-Y contributes to this restricted pattern of expression ( 2 ) .
Two recently published papers report that NF-Y activity is modulated by the depletion of intracellular calcium ( 41 ) and is serum dependent in IMR-90 diploid fibroblasts ( 7 ) .
This modulated activity of NF-Y correlates with the induction of the glucose-regulated protein ( grp/78 ) transcription in cal-cium-depleted cells and with the induction of the human TK gene expression in serum-stimulated IMR-90 cells .
The serum-dependent enhanced binding of NF-Y on the distal CCAAT box of the human TK gene has been explained by differences in NF-YA but not NF-YB subunit expression induced by serum deprivation .
Similarly , we have observed that the level of the NF-YA subunit increases in heme-treated FLCs and during the monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation process whereas NF- YB subunit levels do not change .
These observations suggest that NF-Y activity could be modulated during cell differentiation and/or heme treatment depending on the relative amounts of the two NF-Y subunits .
Thus , the specificity for this activation in different tissues could be provided either through association with other cell-specific factors or through the differential expression of NF-YA .
Moreover , different isoforms of NF-YA have been described to arise from differential splicing of a single transcript to give long and short NF-YA polypeptides ( 29 ) .
Both of these two different isoforms are able to bind DNA , and the transcrip- 1394 MARZIALI ET AL .
tional activation is induced equally by the long and short forms .
According to our Western blot data , the short NF-YA isoform is more prevalent in FLCs and macrophages while the long species of NF- YA is more prevalent in the fibroblastic cell line , where neither transcriptional regulation nor modulation of NF-Y-binding activity has been detected .
From these observa-tions , it is tempting to suggest that the functional differences between these cellular systems could be also explained by the alternative species of the protein present in different cell types .
In conclusion , the transcriptional control of ferritin gene expression seems to be a relevant mechanism in a few specialized cell types such as those of erythroid origin , which must incorporate high levels of iron to sustain hemoglobin synthesis , and in macrophages , which are physiologically involved in iron storage .
This transcriptional control is mediated by a minimum region of 77 nt upstream of the TATA box .
This cis element binds the ubiquitous and constitutive NF-Y protein , which plays a major role in mediating the observed transcriptional activation .
The mechanism involved in cell specificity activation remains to be exactly defined .
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We gratefully acknowledge R. Mantovani for providing us with the YAl3m29 plasmid .
We thank D. Mathis , C. Benoist , and R. Mantovani for providing monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies against NF-Y .
We thank S. Mochi for oligonucleotide preparation and S. Tocchio for editorial assistance .
We are grateful to R. Mantovani for a critical reading of the manuscript and for suggestions .
This work was supported in part by Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche-Progetto Finalizzato ACRO grant 95.00545.39 to A.B .
and UT .
REFERENCES 1 .
Arosio , P. , T. G. Adelman , and J. W. Drysdale .
1978 .
On ferritin heteroge-neity .
Further evidence for heteropolymers .
J. Biol .
Chem .
253:4451-4458 .
2 .
Benoist , C. , and D. Mathis .
1990 .
Regulation of major histocompatibility complex class-II genes : X , Y , and other letters of the alphabet .
Annu .
Rev .
Immunol .
8:681-715 .
3 .
Bevilacqua , M. A. , M. Giordano , P. D'Agostino , C. Santoro , F. Cimino , and F. Costanzo .
1992 .
Promoter for the human ferritin heavy chain-encoding gene ( FERH ) : structural and functional characterization .
Gene 111:255-260 .
4 .
Bevilacqua , M. A. , M. C. Faniello , P. D'Agostino , B. Quaresima , M. T. Tiano , S. Pignata , T. Russo , F. Cimino , and F. Costanzo .
1995 .
Transcriptional activation of the H-ferritin gene in differentiated Caco-2 cells parallels a change in the activity of the nuclear factor Bbf .
Biochem .
J .
311:769-773 .
5 .
Boyd , D. , C. Vecoli , D. M. Belker , S. K. Jain , and J. W. Drysdale .
1985 .
Structural and functional relationships of human ferritin H and L chains deduced from cDNA clones .
J. Biol .
Chem .
260:11755-11761 .
6 .
Cairo , G. , L. Bardella , L. Schiaffonati , P. Arosio , S. Levi , and A .
B. Zazzera .
1985 .
Multiple-mechanisms of iron-induced ferritin synthesis in HeLa cells .
Biochem .
Biophys .
Res .
Commun .
133:314-321 .
7 .
Chang , Z.-F. , and C.-J .
Liu .
1994 .
Human thymidine kinase CCAAT-binding protein is NF-Y , whose A subunit expression is serum-dependent in human IMR-90 diploid fibroblasts .
J. Biol .
Chem .
269:17893-17898 .
8 .
Chodosh , L. A. , A. S. Baldwin , R. W. Carthew , and P. A .
Sharp .
1988 .
Human CCAAT-binding proteins have heterologous subunits .
Cell 53:11-24 .
9 .
Coccia , E. M. , V. Profita , G. Fiorucci , G. Romeo , E. Affabris , U. Testa , M. W. Hentze , and A. Battistini .
1992 .
Modulation of ferritin H-chain expression in Friend erythroleukemia cells : transcriptional and translational regulation by hemin .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
12:3015-3022 .
10 .
Coccia , E. M. , E. Stellacci , E. Perrotti , G. Marziali , and A. Battistini .
1994 .
Differential regulation of ferritin expression in Friend leukemia cells by iron .
J. Biol .
Regul .
Homeostatic Agents 8:81-87 .
11 .
Coccia , E. M. , E. Stellacci , R. Orsatti , U. Testa , and A. Battistini .
1995 .
Regulation of ferritin H-chain expression in differentiating Friend leukemia cells .
Blood 86:1570-1579 .
12 .
Coulson , R. M. R. , and D. W. Cleveland .
1993 .
Ferritin synthesis is controlled by iron-dependent translational derepression and by changes in synthesis/ transport of nuclear ferritin RNAs .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 90:7613-7617 .
13 .
Coustry , F. , S. N. Maity , and B. de Crombrugghe .
1995 .
Studies on transcription activation by multimeric CCAAT-binding factor CBF .
J. Biol .
Chem .
270:468-475 .
14 .
15 .
16 .
17 .
18 .
19 .
20 .
21 .
22 .
23 .
24 .
26 .
27 .
28 .
29 .
30 .
31 .
32 .
33 .
34 .
35 .
36 .
37 .
38 .
39 .
40 .
41 .
Mor .
CELL .
BioL .
Doolittle , R. L. , and G. W. Richter .
1981 .
Isoferritins in rat Kupffer cells , hepatocytes , and extrahepatic macrophages .
Biosynthesis in cell suspensions and cultures in response to iron .
Lab .
Invest .
45:567-574 .
Dorn , A. , J. Bollekens , A. Staub , C. Benoist , and D. Mathis .
1987 .
A multiplicity of CCAAT box-binding proteins .
Cell 50:863-872 .
Drysdale , J. W. , and H. N. Munro .
1986 .
Regulation of synthesis and turnover of ferritin in rat liver .
J. Biol .
Chem .
241:3630-3637 .
Glisin , V. , R. Crkvenjakov , and C. Byus .
1974 .
Ribonucleic acid isolated by cesium chloride centrifugation .
Biochemistry 13:2633-2637 .
Greiser-Wilke , I. , W. Ostertag , P. Goldfarb , A. Lang , M. Furusawa , and J. F. Conscience .
1981 .
Inducibility of spleen focus forming virus by BrdUrd is controlled by the differentiated state of the cell .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 78:2995-2999 .
Hemsley , A. , N. Amheim , M. D. Toney , G. Cortopassi , and D. J. Galas .
1989 .
A simple method for site-directed mutagenesis using the polymerase chain reaction .
Nucleic Acids Res .
17:6545-6551 .
Hentze , M. W. , S. Keim , P. Papadopoulos , S. O'Brien , W. Modi , J. Drysdale , W. J. Leonard , J .
B. Harford , and R. D. Klausner .
1986 .
Cloning , charac-terization , expression and chromosomal localization of a human ferritin heavy chain gene .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 83:7226-7230 .
Hentze , M. W. , S. W. Caugh T. A. R It , J. Barri I , A. Dancis , J .
B. Harford , and R. D. Klausner .
1987 .
Identification of the iron-responsive element for the translational regulation of human ferritin mRNA .
Science 238:1570-1573 .
Hooft van Huijsduijnen , R. , X. J. Li , D. Black , H. Matthes , C. Benoist , and D. Mathis .
1990 .
Co-evolution from yeast to mouse : cDNA cloning of the two NF-Y ( CP-1/CBF ) subunits .
EMBO J .
9:3119-3127 .
Johnson , P. F. , and S. McKnight .
1989 .
Eukaryotic transcriptional regulatory proteins .
Annu .
Rev .
Biochem .
58:799-839 .
Kim , C. G. , and M. Sheffery .
1990 .
Physical characterization of the purified , CCAAT transcription factor , « CP1 .
J. Biol .
Chem .
265:13362-13369. .
Kim , L.-S. , S. Sinha , B. de Crombrugghe , and S. N. Maity .
1996 .
Determi- nation of functional domains in the C subunit of the CCAAT-binding factor ( CBF ) necessary for formation of a CBF-DNA complex : CBF-B interacts simultaneously with both the CBF-A and CBF-C subunits to form a hetero-trimeric CBF molecule .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
16:4003-4013 .
Klausner , R. D. , T. A. Rouault , and J .
B. Harford .
1993 .
Regulating the fate of mRNA : the control of cellular iron metabolism .
Cell 72:19-28 .
Kuhn , L. C. , and M. W. Hentze .
1992 .
Coordination of cellular iron metabolism by post-transcriptional gene regulation .
J. Inorg .
Biochem .
47:183-195 .
Kwak , E. L. , D. A. Larochelle , C. Beaumont , S. V. Torti , and F. M. Torti .
1995 .
Role of NF- « B in the regulation of ferritin H by tumor necrosis factor- « .
J. Biol .
Chem .
270:15285-15293 .
Li , X.-V. , R. Hooft van Huisjduijnen , R. Mantovani , C. Benoist , and D. Mathis .
1992 .
Intron-exon organization of the NF-Y genes .
J. Biol .
Chem .
267:8984-8990 .
Lim , L. C. , L. Fang , S. L. Swendeman , and M. Sheffery .
1993 .
Characterization of the molecularly cloned murine « -globin transcription factor CP2 .
J. Biol .
Chem .
268:18008-18017 .
Mantovani , R. , U. Pessara , F. Tronche , X.-Y .
Li , A.-M. Knapp , J. L. Pas-quali , C. Benoist , and D. Mathis .
1992 .
Monoclonal antibodies to NF-Y define its function in MHC class II and albumin gene transcription .
EMBO J .
11:3315-3322 .
Mantovani , R. , X.-Y .
Li , U. Pessara , R. Hooft van Huijsduijnen , C. Benoist , and D. Mathis .
1994 .
Dominant negative analogs of NF-YA .
J. Biol .
Chem .
269:20340-20346 .
Mattia , E. , J. den Blaauwen , G. Ashwell , and J. van Renswoude .
1989 .
Multiple post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms in ferritin gene expression .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 86:1801-1805 .
Oikarinen , J. , A. Hatamochi , and B. de Crombrugghe .
1987 .
Separate binding sites for nuclear factor 1 a CCAAT DNA binding factor in the mouse a 2 ( I ) collagen promoter .
J. Biol .
Chem .
262:11064-11070 .
Padmanaban , G. , V. Venkateswar , and P. N. Rangarajan .
1989 .
Hacm as a multifunctional regulator .
Trends Biochem .
Sci .
14:492-496 .
Raymondjean , M. , S. Cereghini , and M. Yaniv .
1988 .
Several distinct `` CCAAT `` box binding proteins coexist in eukaryotic cells .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 85:757-761 .
Reuben , R. C. , R. A. Rifkind , and P. A .
Marks .
1980 .
Chemically induced murine erythroleukemic differentiation .
Biochim .
Biophys .
Acta 605:325-346 .
Rice , D. W. , G. G. Ford , J. L. White , J. M. A. Smith , and P. M. Harrison .
1983 .
Comparative aspects of ferritin structure , metal binding , and immu-nochemistry , p. 11-16 .
In I. Urushizaki , P. Aisen , I. Listowsky , and J. W. Drysdale ( ed . )
, Structure and function of iron storage and transport proteins .
Elsevier Biomedical Press , Amsterdam , The Netherlands .
Rittling , S. R. , and R. C. Woodworth .
1984 .
The synthesis and turnover of ferritin in rat L-6 cells .
Rates and response to iron , actinomycin D , and desferrioxamine .
J. Biol .
Chem .
259:5561-5566 .
Rogers , J. , and H. N. Munro .
1987 .
Translation of ferritin light and heavy subunit mRNAs is regulated by intracellular chelatable iron levels in rat hepatoma cells .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 84:2277-2281 .
Roy , B. , and A. S. Lee .
1995 .
Transduction of calcium through interaction of Vor .
17 , 1997 42 .
43. the human transcription factor CBF with the proximal CCAAT regulatory element of the grp/BiP promoter .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
15:2263-2274 .
Sinha , S. , S. N. Maity , J. Lu , and B. de Crombrugghe .
1995 .
Recombinant rat CBF-C , the third subunit of CBF/NFY , allows formation of a protein-DNA complex with CBF-A and CBF-B and with yeast HAP 2 and HAP 3 .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 92:1624-1628 .
Testa , U. , M. Petrini , M. T. Quaranta , E. Pelosi-Testa , G. Mastroberardino , A. Camagna , G. Boccoli , M. Sargi , G. Isacchi , A. Cozzi , P. Arosio , and C , .
Peschle .
1989 .
Iron upmodulates the expression of TfRs during monocyte-macrophage maturation .
J. Biol .
Chem .
264:13181-13187 .
NF-Y AND FERRITIN H-CHAIN GENE TRANSCRIPTION | 1395 44 .
Theil , E. C. 1987 .
Ferritin : structure , gene regulation , and cellular function in animals , plants , and microorganisms .
Annu .
Rev .
Biochem .
56:289-315 .
45 .
Wagstaff , M. , M. Worwood , and A. Jacobs .
1978 .
Properties of human tissue isoferritins .
Biochem .
J .
173:969-977 .
46 .
White , K. , and H. N. Munro .
1988 .
Induction of ferritin subunit synthesis by iron is regulated at both the transcriptional and translational levels .
J. Biol .
Chem .
263:8938-8942 .
47 .
Wigler , M. , R. Sweet , G. K. Sim , B. Wold , A. Pollicer , E. Lacy , T. Maniatis , S. Silverstein , and R. Axel .
1979 .
Transformation of mammalian cells with genes from procaryotes and eucaryotes .
Cell 16:777-785 .
