Reports parameters may be causally related .
These findings imply that ZO-1 synthesis and incorporation into the tight junction complex is an important aspect of BRB formation and support the observation that ACM increases tight junction protein expression in cultured brain capillary endothelial cells . ``
Astrocyte-derived factors may also induce expression of other tight junction proteins , such as occludin .
We performed preliminary studies to examine the general nature of the factors that increase ZO-1 protein expression .
Heating both serum-containing and serum-free ACM for 10 minutes at 100°C abolished the upregulation of ZO-1 expression .
Because peptide factors are often heat-labile , we suggest that a protein or a peptide , rather than cyclic AMP or a carbohy-drate , mediates the effect .
These results are consistent with findings of trypsin- and cycloheximide-sensitive upregulation of microvessel endothelial cell glucose analog uptake and y-glutamyl transpeptidase activity by ACM . ``
These data further suggest that the factors from astrocytes that induce ZO-1 protein expression , and presumably the BRB and BBB , are soluble and may cross the endothelial cell basement membrane in vivo .
Overall , these results indicate that glial cells regulate retinal microvascular barrier functions and suggest that glial dysfunction may play a pivotal role in the permeabilization of microvessels in diabetic reti-nopathy and other retinal disorders associated with edema .
We have recently observed glial reactivity in retinas of rats with short-duration diabetes ( Lieth et al , unpublished data ) , consistent with early functional changes of glial cells in diabetes .
Key Words astrocytes , blood-retinal barrier , capillary endothelium , tight junctions , ZO-1 2427 References 1 .
Arthur FE , Shivers RR , Bowman PD .
Astrocyte-medi-ated induction of tight junctions in brain capillary endothelium : an efficient in vitro model .
Dev Brain Res .
1987 ; 36:155-159 .
2 .
Hollander H , Makarov F , Dreher Z , et al .
Structure of the macroglia of the retina : sharing and division of labour between astrocytes and Muller cells .
J Comp Neurol .
1991 ; 313:587-603 .
8 .
Rubin LL , Hall DE , Porter S , et al .
A cell-culture model of the blood-brain barrier .
/J Cell Biol 1991 ; 115:1725-1735 .
4 .
Anderson JM , Van Itallie CM .
Tight junctions and the molecular basis for regulation of paracellular perme-ability .
Am J Physiol .
1995 ; 269:0467-G476 .
5 .
Krause D , Mischeck U , Galla HJ , Dermietzel R. Correlation of zonula occludens ZO-1 antigen expression and transendothelial resistance in porcine and rat cultured cerebral endothelial cells .
Neurosci Let .
1991 ; 128:8301-304 .
6 .
Gardner TW .
Histamine , ZO-1 and BRB permeability in diabetic retinopathy .
Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc .
1995 ; 93:583-621 .
7 .
Louis JC , Magal E , Muir D , Manthorp M , Varon S. CG-4 , A new bipotential glial cell line from rat brain , is capable of differentiating in vitro into either mature oligodendrocytes or type-2 astrocytes .
J Newrosci Res .
1992 ; 31:193-204 .
8 .
Stone J , Dreher Z .
Relationship between astrocytes , ganglion cells and vasculature of the retina .
/ Comp Neurol .
1987 ; 255:35-49 .
9 .
Gillies MC , Su T , Naidoo D. Electrical resistance and macromolecular permeability of retinal capillary endothelial cells in vitro .
Curr Eye Res .
1995 ; 14:435-442 .
10 .
Maxwell A , Berliner JA , Cancilla PA .
Induction of y-glutamyl transpeptidase in cultured cerebral endothelial cells by a product released by astrocytes .
Brain Res .
1987 ; 410:309-314 .
Suppression of Nuclear Factor Kappa B and CD18-Mediated Leukocyte Adhesion to the Corneal Endothelium by Dexamethasone Masaru Shimoyama , * Shigeto Shimmura , *t Kazuo Tsubota , *t and Yoshihisa Oguchi* From the *Department of Ophthalmology , Keia University School of Medicine , Tokyo , Japan , and the tDepartment of Ophthalmology , Tokyo Dental College , Chiba , Japan .
Submitted for publication February 19 , 1997 ; revised April 9 , 1997 , and May 6 , 1997 ; accepted fune 11 , 1997 .
Proprietary interest category : N. Reprint requests : Shigeto Shimmura , Department of Ophthabnotogy , Tokyo Dental College , Sugano 5-11-13 , Chiba 272 , Japan .
Downloaded from iovs.arvojoumals.org on 05/10/2019 Purpose .
To demonstrate that leukocyte adhesion to cultured corneal endothelial cells is mediated by the CD18 antigen , and to determine whether dexamethasone directly suppresses adhesion by inhibiting activation of nuclear factor kappa B ( NFkB ) .
Methods .
Cultured bovine corneal endothelium was stimulated for 6 hours by 40 u/ml tumor necrosis factor alpha ( TNFa ) .
Dexamethasone was added 1 hour before TNFa stimulation in the dexamethasone group .
After sumulation , neutrophils separated from a healthy human volunteer were added with or without anti-CD18 antibody .
The culture plate was settled for 15 minutes at 37°C , and then neutrophils were activated by N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine for 5 minutes .
Nonadherent neutrophils were removed by sealing and inverting the culture well , The intracellular localization of NFkB after TNFa simulation was determined by confocal immunocytochemistry using an anti-p65 antibody .
2428 Results .
Neutrophil adhesion to cultured corneal endothelial cells increased significantly on exposure to TNFa ( 451.4 + 45.4 cells/mm `` , n » = 16 ) compared to control ( 156.7 + 27.3 cells/mm `` , n » = 16 , P < 0.01 ) .
This increased adhesion was suppressed by the addition of anti-CD18 antibody ( 157.6 + 25.1 cells/mm `` , n = 8 , P < 0.01 ) and by pretreatment with 107 `` M dexamethasone ( 207.9 + 31.5 cells/mm `` , » = 10 , P < 0.01 ) .
Immunocytochemistry 60 minutes after stimulation revealed that NFkB was located in .the cytoplasm in unstimulated cells ; however , the addition of TNFa caused NFkB to translocate into the nucleus .
Pretreatment with dexamethasone tapered NFkB translocation into the nucleus .
Conclusions , Leukocyte adhesion to the corneal endothelium was shown to be mediated by CD18 expressed on activated leukocytes .
Pretreatment of the endothelium with dexamethasone inhibited leukocyte adhe-sion ; this may be due 'in part to the suppression of NFkB entry into the nucleus .
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci .
1997 ; 838:2427-2431 .
Karmic precipitates is a term used to describe the clinical observation of inflammatory cells adherent to the corneal endothelium during intraocular inflammation such as in uveitis , keratitis , and corneal allograft rejection .
The presence of such cells can cause degenerative changes of the corneal endothelium ' that can ultimately lead to corneal decompensation .
Reports have indicated that intercellular adhesion molecule-1 ( ICAM-1 ) , the counterpart to the lympho-cyte function-associated antigen-l1 ( LFA-1 ) found on leukocytes,2 is expressed on corneal endothelial cells .
ICAM-1 is upregulated on the cell membrane by proin-flammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor alpha ( TNFa ) , interleukin 1/3 , and interferon gamma ; these cytokines regulate the immune response during intraocular inflammation . ``
Monoclonal antibodies against ICAM-1 and LFA-1 inhibit endotoxin-induced uveitis* and leukocyte adhesion to the corneal endo-thelium* and prolong corneal allograft survival , `` indicating that the expression of this adhesion molecule is integral in eliciting an inflammatory response in the anterior chamber .
Glucocorticoids are widely used clinically as potent antiinflammatory and immunosuppressive agents for the treatment of intraocular inflammatory dis-eases .
However , their therapeutic mechanism was unclear until a study by Auphan et al `` demonstrated that dexamethasone inhibits nuclear factor kappa B ( NFkB ) translocation into the nuclei of cytokine-acti-vated cells .
NFkB is bound to the regulatory protein IkB within the cytosol until a cascade of events following cell activation causes proteolytic cleavage of NFkB .
This allows NFkB to enter the nucleus and subsequently bind to the promoter or enhancer sequences Downloaded from iovs.arvojoumals.org on 05/10/2019 Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science , October 1997 , Vol .
38 , No .
11 of numerous functional proteins , including ICAM-l and major histocompatibility classes I and II* This study was designed to investigate whether leukocyte adhesion to cultured bovine corneal endothelial cells ( BCE ) is mediated by the CD18 antigen ( LFA-1 ) expressed on leukocytes , and to examine whether dexamethasone can suppress adhesion by inhibiting NFkB activation in BCE .
‘ MATERIALS AND METHODS .
BCE Culture .
Fresh bovine eyes were obtained from a local abattoir and carried on ice until culture .
Eyes were prepared for culture within 6 hours of enucleation .
The cornea was excised after rinsing the eye with Ca** , Mg**-free phosphate-buffered saline ( PBS ) .
The corneal endothelium , along with Descemet 's membrane , was removed using microforceps without disrupting underlying stroma .
Segments of endothelial sheets were incubated in PBS containing trypsin ( 0.5 mg/ ml ) ( Sigma Chemical , St. Louis , MO ) at 37°C for 4 minutes .
After pipetting the solution for 2 minutes to disperse cells , fetal bovine serum was added ( 20 % final concentra-tion ) .
Cells were centrifuged at 1200 rpm for 5 min - utes and resuspended in Medium 199 , including 10 % fetal bovine serum .
Cells were placed in 24-well culture dishes ( Sumitomo Bakelite , Tokyo , Japan ) at a seeding density of 10° cells/cm `` .
Primary cultures were used in the neutrophil binding assay .
BCE were cultured in 35-mm glass-bottomed culture dishes ( MatTek , Ash-land , MA ) precoated with Vitrogen 100 ( Geltrix , Santa Clara , CA ) for the immunocytochemistry of NFkB .
Human Neutrophil Isolation .
Polymorphonucleo-cytes ( PMNs ) were obtained from heparinized venous blood of a healthy human volunteer .
After 20 minutes ' sedimentation of erythrocytes in 1.5 % dextran-saline , the supernatant layer containing leukocytes was centrifuged in Ficoll-Paque ( Pharmacia , Uppsala , Sweden ) for 25 minutes at 400g and 20°C .
The supernatant containing lymphocytes was discarded , and contaminating erythrocytes within the pellet were lysed by hy-poosmosis with distilled water on ice ( 30 seconds ) .
Hypertonic saline ( 1.8 % ) was added immediately to maintain isotonicity .
This procedure was repeated twice , and after centrifugation the PMN pellet was resuspended in PBS .
Tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki were followed , and informed consent was ob tained before the experiment .
_ Adhesion Assay .
Confluent sheets of BCE were stimulated with 40 u/ml mouse TNFa ( Biosource , Ca-marillo , CA ) for 6 hours .
Cells in the dexamethasone group were pretreated with 10~ ' M dexamethasone 1 hour before TNFa stimulation .
After stimulation , the PMN suspension was added to each well at a density of 2 x 10° PMNs/cm* `` .
Another group of cells was treated with PMNs coincubated with either anti-CD18 monoclonal antibody ( mouse IgG1 , clone 7E4 , Cosmo Reports FIGURE 1 .
Polymorphonucleocyte adhesion to an underlying confluent sheet of bovine corneal endothelial cells after no treatment ( A ) and after pretreatment with tumor necrosis factor alpha ( 40 u/rol ) ( B ) .
Polymorphonucleocyte adhesion increased significantly on exposure to tumor necrosis factor alpha .
Bar = 100 um .
Bio , Tokyo , Japan ) or nonspecific mouse IgG ( nega-tive control ) at a concentration of 2.5 ug/ml .
After settling the plate for 15 minutes at 37°C , neutrophils were stimulated by 107 `` M N-formyl-methionyHeucyl-phenylalanine ( Sigma ) for 5 minutes .
Each well was completely filled with PBS , sealed airtight with a transparent plate seal ( Sumitomo Bakelite ) , and placed upside-down for 5 minutes to allow nonadherent neutrophils to sediment .
Medium was removed by removing the seal while maintaining the plate upside-down , and residual medium was aspirated .
BCE were observed through an inverted phase-contrast microscope ( IMT 2 ; Olympus , Tokyo , Japan ) immediately after discarding media and were observed within 30 minutes to avoid desiccation .
The number of adherent PMNs within a field of view was counted by one masked examiner and expressed in terms of PMNs per mm `` in a randomly selected field of view in each well .
Data were analyzed by one-way analysis of variance using Scheffe's-type multiple comparison test ; probability values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant .
Immunocytochemistry of NFkB .
Semiconfluent BCE were stimulated with 40 u/ml TNFa for 60 minutes with or without pretreatment with dexamethasone 1 hour before TNFa application .
After washing with PBS , cells were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde for 30 minutes and washed with 0.05 % Triton-X for another 30 minutes .
After blocking with 1 % bovine serum albumin ( Sigma ) , cells were washed four times with PBS and incubated with anti-p65 antibody ( 1 ug/ ml ) ( Rockland , Gilbertsville , PA ) for 60 minutes at room temperature .
After washes with PBS , cells were incubated with secondary antirabbit IgG antibody ( 5 ug/ml ) ( Cederlane Laboratories , Hornby , Ontario ) for 60 minutes at room temperature in the dark .
Images were observed using a confocal microscope ( Me-ridian Instruments , Okemos , MI ) equipped with a cooled CCD camera .
Semiquantification of fluores- Downloaded from iovs.arvojournals.org on 05/10/2019 2429 cence immunocytochemistry was attempted by measuring the fluorescence intensity of the nucleus in each cell using an image analyzer ( NIH image v.1.55 ) .
The average intensity within the nucleus of cells in each group ( { n = 20 to 25 ) was represented by a 256-level gray scale gradient , and statistical analysis was performed by the one-way analysis of variance test .
RESULTS .
Adhesion Assay .
Figure 1 is a representative micrograph of PMN adhesion to a confluent sheet of BCE .
The number of PMNs that adhered to the endothelium was 156.7 + 27.3 cells/mm `` ( mean + standard error of the mean , » = 16 ) in the nonstim-ulated group .
Exposure to TNFa significantly increased PMN adhesion to 451.4 + 45.4 cells/mm `` * ( n = 16 , P < 0.01 ) ( Fig .
2 ) .
This increase in adhesion was suppressed by anti-CD18 antibody ( 157.6 + 25.1 cells/mm , n = 8 , P < 0.01 versus the TNFa group ) but not by nonspecific mouse IgG ( 460.4 + 80.7 cells/ mm* , n » = 9 ) .
Pretreatment with 107 `` M dexamethasone suppressed PMN adhesion to 207.9 + $ 1.5 cells/ mm* ( n= 10 , P < 0.01 ) .
NFkB Localization .
Because the upregulation of ICAM-1 , the endothelial adhesion molecule that binds to leukocyte function-associated antigen ( LFA-1 ) and Mac-1 , is dependent on the activation of NFkB , the intracellular location of this transcription factor was examined by fluorescent microscopy .
Immunocytochemistry using a monoclonal antibody against the p65 component of NFkB showed that NFkB is located in the cytosol in unstimulated BCE ; exposure to TNFa caused NFkB to translocate into the nucleus after 10 PMNs/mm ' TNF | antiCD18 _ IgG control DEX FIGURE 2 .
Polymorphonucleocyte ( PMN ) adhesion in each group expressed per mm* .
Bovine corneal endothelial cells in each group except for control were treated with tumor necrosis factor alpha ( TNF ; 40 u/m ! )
for 6 hours .
Cells in the dexamethasone ( DEX ) group received 10~ ' M dexamethasone 1 hour before treatment with tumor necrosis factor alpha .
Anti-CD18 antibody or nonspecific mouse IgG was added to polymorphonucleocyte suspensions 15 minutes before application to cells .
2430 FIGURE 3 .
Nuclear factor kappa B localization in unstimulated control ( A ) , in bovine corneal endothelial cells pretreated with tumor necrosis factor alpha ( 40 u/ml ) for 1 hour ( B ) , and in cells pretreated with 10~ ' M dexamethasone before stimulation with tumor necrosis factor alpha { ( C ) .
Negative control using nonspecific mouse IgG as the primary antibody did not reveal any fluorescence ( D ) .
minutes ( Fig .
3 ) .
The intranuclear translocation of NFkB was attenuated by pretreatment with 10~ ' M dexamethasone .
Suppression by dexamethasone was relatively uniform : virtually all cells treated with dexamethasone had lower staining in the nucleus compared to cytoplasm , but cells treated with TNFa stained more strongly in the nucleus than in the cyto-plasm .
Semiquantitative image analysis revealed that the fluorescence gray level in cell nuclei from the unstimulated group ( 9.6 + 2.2 ) and the dexamethasone group ( 31.8 + 6.1 ) was significantly less ( P < 0.01 ) than the TNFa group ( 99.0 + 5.8 ) ( relative units on a scale of 0 to 256 ) .
DISCUSSION .
To our knowledge , our study is the first to demonstrate the direct inhibition of PMN adhesion to corneal endothelial cells by glucocorti-coids .
This adhesion was also attenuated by pretreatment of PMNs with anti-CD18 antibody , indicating that adhesion molecules are involved .
Many studies have reported that ICAM-1 is upregulated by inflammatory cytokines in various ocular tissues , including the corneal endothelium , which can regulate intraocular immune response . ``
ICAM-1 is the ligand for LFA-1 and Mac-1 expressed on leukocytes , which share the CD18 antigen . ``
Leukocyte adhesion mediated by such adhesion molecules plays an important role in the inflammatory response in many tissues , Antibodies Downloaded from iovs.arvojoumnals.org on 05/10/2019 Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science , October 1997 , Vol .
38 , No .
11 against ICAM-1 have been used in the experimental treatment of systemic inflammatory diseases in animals such as lung inflammation , glomerulonephritis , arthritis , and cardiac allograft rejection .
Anti-ICGAM-1 antibodies and anti-CD18 antibodies have also been studied in ocular diseases such as experimental autoimmune uveitis* and corneal allograft rejection.© The potential clinical use of anti-CD18 antibodies in suppressing corneal inflammation merits further investi-gation : it offers the advantage of a more targeted therapy compared to the broad-range effects of corticoste-roids , PMNs stimulated with chemotactic peptides such as N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine undergo a cascade of events that leads to the activation of LFA-1 and Mac-1 on the cell surface ; these mediate the adherence to ICAM-1 expressed on vascular endothelial cells . ``
Although our study used cultured cells of bovine origin , human PMNs are known to adhere to ICAM-1 expressed on bovine vascular endothelium . ``
Immunocytochemistry of ICAM-1 expressed on BCE was not performed in 'this study because antibodies that bind to bovine ICAM-l were not commercially available .
Glucocorticoids are widely used clinically due to their potent anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects .
The therapeutic mechanism of glucocorticoids includes the suppression of prostaglandin synthesis and cytokine release , as well as the inhibition of adhesion molecule induction `` and major histocompatibility class antigen expression .
Auphan et al `` demonstrated that these effects of dexamethasone are partly caused by the suppression of NFkB activity by inducing IkB synthesis ; by binding to NFkB , IkB inhibits the entry of the complex into the nucleus .
Our study has shown that dexamethasone inhibits NFkB entry into the nucleus of corneal endothelial cells , which may be responsible for the suppression of CD18-mediated PMN adhesion .
This direct suppression of leukocyte adhesion to the corneal endothelium may be one of the many antiinflammatory effects of glucocorticoids in controlling intraocular inflam-mation .
Acknowledgments The authors thank Assistant Professor M. Suematsu of the Department of Biochemistry , Keio University School of Medicine , for invaluable advice and use of equipment in designing this study .
Key Words CD18 , corneal endothelium , nuclear factor kappa B , poly-morphonucleocyte , tumor necrosis factor alpha References 1 .
Inomata H , Smelser GK .
Fine structural alterations Reports of corneal endothelium during experimental uveitis .
Invest Ophthalmol .
1970 ; 9:272-285. .
Larson RS , Springer TA .
Structure and function of leukocyte integrins .
Immunol Rev .
1990 ; 114:181-217. .
Pavilack MA , Elner VM , Elner SG , Todd RD , Huber AR .
Differential expression of human corneal and per-ilimbal ICAM-1 by inflammatory cytokines .
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci .
1992:33:564-573. .
Whitcup SM , Hikita N , Shirao M , et al , Monoclonal antibodies against CD54 ( ICAM-1 ) and CD1l1a ( LFA-1 ) prevent and inhibit endotoxin-induced uveitis .
Exp Eye Res .
1995 ; ,60:597-601. .
Einer VM , Elner SG , Pavilack MA , Todd RD , Yue BY , Huber AR .
Intercellular adhesion molecule-1 in human corneal endothelium .
Modulation and function .
Am J Pathol .
1991 ; 138:525-536 .
._ He Y , Mellon J , Apte R , Niederkorn JY .
Effect of LFA-1 and ICAM-l antibody treatment on murine corneal allograft survival .
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci .
1994 ; 35:35218-3225 .
Downloaded from iovs.arvojoumals.org on 05/10/2019 10 .
2431 Auphan N , DiDonato JA , Rosette C , Helmberg A , Karin M. Immunosuppression by glucocorticoids : Inhibition of NF-kappa B activity through induction of I kappa B synthesis .
Science .
1995 ; Grilli M , Chiu JJ , Lenardo MJ .
NF-kappa B and Rel : Participants in a multiform transcriptional regulatory system .
Int Rev Cytol .
1993 ; 143:1-62 .
Charo IF , Yuen C , Goldstein IM .
Adherence of human polymorphonuclear leukocytes to endothelial mono-layers : Effects of temperature , divalent cations , and chemotactic factors on the strength of adherence measured with a new centrifugation assay .
Blood .
1985 ; 65:473-479 .
Cronstein BN , Kimmel SC , Levin RI , Martiniuk F , Weissmann G. A mechanism for the anti-inflammatory effects of corticosteroids : The glucocorticoid receptor regulates leukocyte adhesion to endothelial cells and expression of endothelial-leukocyte adhesion molecule 1 and intercellular adhesion molecule 1 .
Proc Nail Acad Sci USA .
1992 ; 89:9991-9995 .
