Immunology 1997 92 512-518 Endothelial production of MCP-1 : modulation by heparin and consequences for mononuclear cell activation M. S. DOUGLAS , S. ALI , D. A. RIX , J.-G. ZHANG & J .
A. KIRBY Transplant Immunobiology Unit , Department of Surgery , University of Newcastle , Newcastle upon Tyne , UK SUMMARY Heparin is a polyanionic glycosaminoglycan ( GAG ) that can bind with high affinity to a range of cytokines including interferon-y ( IFN-y ) and members of the chemokine superfamily .
This GAG also possesses immunomodulatory activity in vivo and can antagonize the capacity of IFN-y to induce class II MHC antigen expression , and to up-regulate intercellular adhesion molecule-1 , by cultured endothelial cells .
Previous studies have shown that binding to cell-surface heparan sulphate is essential for optimal activity of IFN-y and that free heparin competitively inhibits this sequestration process .
The present study was performed to increase our understanding of the immunosuppressive activity of heparin by investigation of potential antagonism of the production and function of monocyte chemotactic peptide-l ( MCP-1 ) , a chemokine important for mononuclear leucocyte recruitment across vascular endothelium .
It was found that mixture of heparin with IFN-y inhibited up-regulation of the signal transducer and activator of transcription protein , STAT-1 produced normally by treatment of endothelial cells with IFN-y .
An inhibition of MCP-1 production was observed that was specifically caused by mixture of IFN-y with heparin-like , and therefore cytokine-binding , GAGs .
It was also shown that mixture of heparin-like GAGs with MCP-1 inhibited the rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase which is normally produced by treatment of mononuclear leucocytes with this chemokine .
Blockade of this intracellular signalling event was associated with a reduction in the normal transendothelial migration response towards MCP-1 .
Results from this study indicate that soluble , heparin-like GAGs can block IFN-y-dependent up-regulation of MCP-1 production by cultured endothelial cells , and can also antagonize the leucocyte-activating and migration-promoting properties of pre-existing MCP-1 .
These activities may contribute to the immunomodulatory properties of heparin .
INTRODUCTION Interferon-y ( IFN-y ) is an important proinflammatory cytokine , playing a central role in immune and inflammatory responses .
This pleiotropic molecule is produced by activated CD8* and Thli-type CD4* T cells , and possesses anti-viral Received 3 August 1997 ; revised 5 September 1997 ; accepted 10 September 1997 .
Abbreviations : c.p.m .
, counts per minute ; CS-C , chondroitin sulphate-C ; EBV , Epstein-Barr virus ; FBS , fetal bovine serum ; GAG , glycosaminoglycan ; HLE , human lung microvascular endothelium ; HS , heparan sulphate ; ICAM-1 , intercellular adhesion molecule-1 ; IFN-y , interferon-y ; JAK , Janus kinase ; MCP-1 , monocyte chemotactic peptide-1 ; MLR , mixed leucocyte reaction ; PBL , peripheral blood lymphocyte ; PBMC , peripheral blood mononuclear cell ; PI 3-kinase , phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase ; SEM , standard error of the mean ; STAT , signal transducer and activator of transcription .
Correspondence : Dr J .
A. Kirby , Transplant Immunobiology Unit , Department of Surgery , University of Newcastle , Newcastle-upon-Tyne , NE2 4HH , UK .
and phagocyte-activating properties . ``
A further effect of IFN-y is to augment the potential immunogenicity of a variety of cells , such as those of vascular endothelium . ``
Specific effects on endothelial cells include up-regulation of the expression of adhesion molecules , such as intercellular adhesion molecule-1 ( ICAM-1 ) , and class I1 major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) antigens* and the induction of class I1 MHC antigens .
The induction of endothelial class II MHC antigens by IFN-y is initiated by activation of the Janus kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription ( JAK/STAT ) intracellular signalling pathway* which , in turn , up-regulates the class II MHC transactivator .
The surface of endothelium is covered by a dense layer of proteoglycans , the main functional components of which are glycosaminoglycans ( GAGs ) .
The most abundant endothelial GAG is the polyanionic species heparan sulphate ( HS ) , which is structurally and biosynthetically related to heparin .
> Heparin is known to bind with high affinity a range of growth factors and cytokines , including the chemokines , ® interleukin-1 ( IL-1 ) , IL-2 , IL-3 , IL-6 , `` tumour necrosis factor `` and IFN-y . ``
There ©1997 Blackwell Science Ltd Modulation of cytokines by heparin 513 is growing evidence that an important function of endothelial cell surface HS is to bind cytokines , so that their effective local concentration is maintained .
In the absence of such a mechanism , cytokines would lose biological activity rapidly by dilution into the blood or tissue fluids ; this is an essential function on the luminal surface of endothelium where blood flow is rapid .
Previous studies by this group ' `` and others ' have shown that soluble , heparin-like GAGs are able to antagonize the biological activity of IFN-y in vitro .
It is proposed that this effect is produced by competition between free heparin and cell-surface HS to bind this cytokine resulting in reduced bioavailability , and hence activity , at the cell surface .
This finding may go some way to explaining reports that heparin has immunosuppressive properties .
For example , it is known that heparin can reduce the severity of the inflammatory autoimmune disease experimental allergic encephalomyelitis'* and can delay skin'* and solid organ allograft rejection . ``
Previous studies have shown that anti-IFN-y antibodies can also delay renal allograft rejection , ' `` whilst IFN-y knockout mice show an atypical allograft rejection response . ``
'' Recent studies have identified members of a superfamily of low molecular weight proteins , termed the chemokines , as critical regulators of leucocyte infiltration of sub-endothelial tissues at sites of inflammation .
In this respect it is significant that endothelial cells can be induced to produce chemokines , `` `` and that these molecules bind with high affinity to HS and heparin.© Production of the chemokine monocyte chemotactic peptide-1 ( MCP-1 ) can be induced by treatment of endothelial cells with IFN-y ; *° this chemokine is generally considered to be important for inducing intravascular adhesion and transendothelial chemotaxis of monocytes and T lymphocytes . ``
It has been shown recently that activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase ( PI 3-kinase ) plays an important role in chemokine signal transduction leading to leucocyte chemotaxis . ``
'' The present study was designed to examine further aspects of the anti-inflammatory effect of heparin .
Microvascular endothelial cells were treated with IFN-y and the effects of heparin addition on cytoplasmic signal transduction events and on the production of MCP-1 were assessed by Western blotting and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ) , respectively .
The consequences for allograft rejection of reduced MCP-1 production were modelled by examination of T-cell activation and chemotactic responses to recombinant MCP-1 and to the chemokines produced by microvascular endothelial cells treated with supernatant from an allogeneic mixed leucocyte reaction ( MLR ) .
MATERIALS AND METHODS Culture of human lung microvascular endothelial cells Human lung microvascular endothelial ( HLE ) cells from single donors were obtained at passage 4 ( Clonetics ; TCS Biologicals , Buckingham , UK ) and cultured in endothelial cell growth medium ( BulletKit ; Clonetics ) supplemented with heparin-free bovine brain extract ( Clonetics ) .
Prior to dispatch all cultures were tested for expression of factor VIII-related antigen and CD31 , and for the uptake of low-density lipoproteins .
The HLE cells were grown in 25 cm flasks ( Corning , Stone , UK ) at 37° in an atmosphere containing 5 % CO ; in air , and were ©1997 Blackwell Science Ltd , Immunology , 92 , 512-518 subcultured every 4-5 days .
Experiments were performed using cultures between passages 8 and 11 .
Preparation of leucocyte populations Peripheral blood mononuclear cells ( PBMC ) were isolated from heparinized blood samples , taken from healthy volun-teers .
Blood samples were diluted 1 : 1 with RPMI-1640 culture medium ( Gibco BRL , Paisley , UK ) and underlayed with Ficoll-Hypaque at 1-077 g/ml ( Lymphoprep ; Nycomed , Birmingham , UK ) .
Following centrifugation at 400g for 25 min , the interfacial cells were collected , washed twice and resuspended at the appropriate concentration in complete culture medium consisting of RPMI-1640 medium containing 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ; Gibco BRL ) , 100 U/ml !
penicillin and 100 ug/ml streptomycin ( Sigma , Poole , UK ) .
Peripheral blood lymphocytes ( PBL ) were prepared by depletion of monocytes from PBMC populations .
Cells were incubated at 37° for 45 min in a culture flask containing 10 ml of complete RPMI culture medium , after which time non-adherent cells were recovered and resuspended at the required concentration .
Generation of an Epstein-Barr virus-transformed B-cell line An immortalized B-cell line was obtained by transformation of a lymphocyte preparation , using methodology previously described . ``
Briefly , 1x 10 ' PBL were treated with culture supernatant from the Epstein-Barr virus ( EBV ) -secreting B95-8 cell line ( ECACC 8501419 ; Porton Down , UK ) .
Cyclosporin A ( 1 ug/ml ; Sandoz , Basle , Switzerland ) was added to the initial cell culture , to prevent activation of specific T cells .
The outgrowing B cells were maintained in complete RPMI culture medium , in upright 75 cm flasks ( Corning ) and were subcultured in the ratio 1:3 , at 4-5-day intervals .
Mixed leucocyte reaction A two-way MLR was set up in a canted 75 cm flask containing 1 x 10 `` PBMC and 1 x 10 `` EBV-transformed B cells in a total volume of 20 ml .
Culture supernatant was collected after 72 hr , centrifuged to remove cellular debris , and subsequently used to stimulate endothelial cells .
Cytokine stimulation of endothelial cells For experimental use , endothelial cells were grown in 24-well cluster plates ( Corning ) .
Once confluent , the cells were washed and 500 ul of RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 5 % FBS ( RPMI/5 % FBS ) and 100 U/ml of recombinant IFN-y ( R & D Systems , Abingdon , UK ) was added .
In some wells , GAGs were also added to the medium ; these included heparin ( Sigma ) , HS ( Leo Pharmaceutical Products , Copenhagen , Denmark ) and chondroitin sulphateeC ( CS-C ; Sigma ) , at concentrations between 0 and 250 ug/ml .
Following cytokine treatment for 24 hr , culture supernatants were collected and the MCP-1 concentration in each was measured by quantitative sandwich enzyme immunoassay ( R & D Systems ) .
Control experiments demonstrated that this assay was not influenced by the presence of heparin , implying that the antibodies recognize epitopes that are remote from GAG-binding domains .
Further experiments were performed , in which endothelial cells were stimulated using culture supernatant from a MLR .
Confluent cells in a 25 cm `` flask were treated with 3 ml of 514 M. S. Douglas et al .
MLR supernatant for 24 hr , after which time they were washed three times with culture medium and incubated for a further 24 hr in 3 ml of RPMI/5 % FBS .
Finally , the culture supernatants were collected and either analysed for MCP-1 content by ELISA , or used to stimulate PBMC in subsequent assays .
In order to investigate the effect of IFN-y on expression of signal transducer and activator of transcription-1 protein ( STAT-1 ) in endothelium , HLE cells were grown to confluence in 75 cm* flasks .
These cells were then treated for 18 hr with IFN-y in the presence or absence of 250 ug/ml heparin , after which time they were detached from the surface using sterile scrapers ( Corning ) .
The cells were recovered by centrifugation , washed once in phosphate-buffered saline ( PBS ) , and lysed by addition of 250 ul of gel-loading buffer consisting of 125 mm Tris-HCl ( pH 6:8 ) , 2 % sodium dodecyl sulphate ( SDS ) , 10 % glycerol , 10 % 2-mercaptoethanol and 0:001 % bromophenol blue .
Cell lysates were then analysed by Western blotting .
Transendothelial migration assays HLE cells were grown to confluence on cell culture membrane inserts of 3-um pore size ( Falcon ; Becton Dickinson , Cowley , UK ) .
Inserts were placed in the wells of a 24-well companion plate ( Falcon ) containing l1ml of RPMI/5 % FBS and 0-10 ng/ml of MCP-1 .
For some experiments 10 ng/ml of MCP-1 was pre-mixed with 100 ug/ml of heparin or CS-C prior to addition to the culture wells Mononuclear cells ( 1x 10° cells ) were then added to the upper surface of the membrane inserts , and the plate was incubated for 3 hr at 37° .
The number of cells in each well migrating across the endothelial monolayer was quantified using a rapid flow cytometric method .
Cells were recovered from each well , washed by centrifugation and resuspended in 200 ul of PBS .
Five micro-litres of a uniformly mixed suspension of fluorescent spheres ( Immuno-Check ; Coulter Electronics , Luton , UK ) was then added to each sample .
The resulting mixture of cells and fluorescent spheres was analysed by flow cytometry ( FACScan ; Becton Dickinson ) and Lysis II software ( Becton Dickinson ) was used to separate the two particle populations .
The ratio of cells to fluorescent beads was used to provide a rapid measure of the number of migrant mononuclear leucocytes in each sample ; all results were normalized to control levels of migration .
A further series of experiments was performed to determine the capacity of culture supernatants , collected previously from endothelial cells treated with normal or MLR-conditioned medium , to induce transendothelial migration of PBMC .
The effect on chemotaxis of the addition of heparin or CS-C at 250 ug/ml to the endothelial culture supernatants was also evaluated .
Cytokine stimulation of PBMC PBMC ( 2:5 x 10° cells/ml ) were treated for between 0 and 30 min at 37° with pre-warmed complete culture medium containing 15 ng/ml of recombinant MCP-1 ( R & D Systems ) .
Cells were then pelleted by centrifugation at 4° and lysed by addition of 100 pul of gel-loading buffer , prior to analysis by Western blotting .
For some experiments the MCP-1 was pre-mixed with 100 ug/ml !
of heparin or CS-C prior to addition to the leucocytes for 10 min .
In further experiments , PBMC were stimulated with 1:5 ml of culture supernatants collected previously from endothelial cells treated with normal culture medium or MLR supernatant .
Stimulation was performed for up to 15 min at 37° , after which time the cells were lysed and their protein content was analysed by Western blotting .
Western analysis Electrophoresis of protein samples was carried out using 10 % SDS-polyacrylamide gels , and proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose filters ( Hybond-C ; Amersham International , Little Chalfont , UK ) by electroblotting .
Filters were blocked using protocols specified by the suppliers of the antibody to be used for subsequent immunodetection .
After blocking , filters were incubated with antibodies directed against STAT-1 ( 1 : 2500 dilution ; Transduction Laboratories ; Affiniti Research Products , Exeter , UK ) , PI 3-kinase ( 85000 MW subunit , 1 : 5000 dilution ; Transduction Laboratories ) , or phosphotyrosine residues ( 1:2500 dilution ; Transduction Laboratories ) .
Filters were then washed , and protein was visualized using a chemiluminescence system ( ECL ; Amersham International ) with polyclonal horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies ( Transduction Laboratories ) .
The phosphotyrosine content of PI 3-kinase was assessed by sequential identification , and quantification of both antigens on the same filter .
In order to reprobe the filters , they were stripped of antibodies by incubation at 50° for 45 min in 62:5 mm Tris-HCI ( pH 7-6 ) containing 100 mm 2-mercaptoethanol , and washed three times .
Following development , the relative intensity of the bands was measured by densitometric analysis using Molecular Analyst computer software ( BioRad , Hemel Hempstead , UK ) .
The relative protein loading of each lane was assessed by densitometry of duplicate gels following standard Coomassie blue staining .
Statistical analysis Results were routinely calculated as the mean + the standard error of the mean ( SEM ) .
The significance of experimental changes was assessed by application of Student 's r-test .
All data analysis was performed using Minitab computer software ( Clecom , Birmingham , UK ) .
RESULTS The HLE cells rapidly formed confluent monolayers of cells which showed a regular cobblestone morphology typical of endothelial cells .
The results of Western analysis of protein extracts from HLE cells are shown in Fig .
1 .
Resting cells showed only low-level expression of STAT but densitometric analysis revealed that the expression of this protein was up-regulated approximately 13-fold following stimulation of the cells with IFN-y .
Following induction with IFN-y it was clear that two components of STAT were detected by Western blotting ; these had apparent molecular weights of 91 000 and 84000 .
Significantly , the up-regulation of STAT-1 was not observed when stimulation with IFN-y was performed in the presence of heparin .
A similar amount of total protein was fractionated by electrophoresis in each case .
Sensitive ELISA was used to measure the concentration of MCP-1 in matched cultures of resting and IFN-y-stimulated HLE ( Fig .
2 ) .
It was found that stimulation for 24 hr with IFN-y at 100 U/ml increased the concentration of MCP-1 from 0-17 +0-01 ng/ml to 1:45 +0-04 ng/ml ( P < 0-02 ) .
©1997 Blackwell Science Ltd , Immunology , 92 , 512-518 Modulation of cytokines by heparin 515 1 2 3 p91 p84 Figure 1 .
Effect on the expression of STAT-1 of stimulation of endothelial cells with IFN-y .
This Western blot shows STAT-1 expression by ( lane 1 ) resting endothelial cells , ( lane 2 ) cells stimulated with IFN-y and ( lane 3 ) cells stimulated with a mixture of IFN-y and heparin .
These representative data are from one of three similar experiments .
a 15 7 € 4 D £ E 3 k=l g 1-0 5 C 9 fo § 054 o C 8 p o. O E 0 T `` T -- f T T T T T to 0 50 100 150 200 250 GAG concentration ( g/ml ) Figure 2 .
The concentration of MCP-1 in variously treated endothelial cell cultures .
The hatched bar shows the concentration of MCP-1 in the medium from resting cell cultures ( @ ) the MCP-1 concentration in medium from cells cultured with IFN-y in the presence of 0-250 ug/ml of heparin ( M ) the concentration of MCP-1 produced by IFN-y-treated cells in the presence of HS at 250 ug/ml ( A ) the concentration of MCP-1 produced by cells cultured with IFN-y in the presence of 250 ug/ml of CS-C. Each point represents the mean of triplicate determinations ; error bars show the SEM .
However , when similar experiments were performed in the presence of increasing concentrations of heparin it was found that the concentration of MCP-1 in the culture medium was reduced ; indeed the concentration in the presence of heparin at between 125 and 250 ug/ml was not significantly different from that produced by resting HLE cells .
A heparin concentration of 16 ug/ml blocked more than half of the MCP-1 induction by IFN-y .
Addition of 250 ug/ml of HS also inhibited the induction of MCP-1 by IFN-y but to a slightly smaller extent than heparin ( P < 0-05 ; Fig .
2 ) .
By contrast , the presence of a maximal 250 ug/ml of CS-C had no effect on the production of MCP-1 by IFN-y-stimulated HLE cells .
Experiments were also performed to assess the production of MCP-1 by endothelial cells following stimulation by a more physiological source of proinflammatory cytokines .
©1997 Blackwell Science Ltd , Immunology , 92 , 512-518 Endothelial cell monolayers were stimulated with either MLR-conditioned medium or normal culture medium for 24 hr , were then washed extensively and were cultured for a further 24 hr in fresh medium .
After this time the concentration of MCP-1 in the medium was measured by ELISA .
It was found that cells treated with normal medium produced a concentration of MCP-1 of 1-2+01 ng/ml , whilst cells which had been pretreated with the MLR supernatant produced the significantly greater concentration of 11:3 +0-2 ng/ml ( P < 0-01 ) ; the MLR-conditioned medium itself was found to contain MCP-1 at a concentration of 60+0-1 ng/ml .
This enhanced production of MCP-1 was not altered by addition of 250 ug/ml of heparin to the MLR supernatant A transendothelial migration assay was used to assess the migration-promoting activity of MCP-1 This assay showed that relatively few leucocytes in the resting population crossed a confluent endothelial cell monolayer during a 3-hr incubation period .
However , the number of migrant cells was increased by addition of MCP-1 to the lower chamber of the transwell system .
This increase reached statistical significance at an MCP-1 concentration of 5 ng/ml ( P < 0-05 ) .
A further increase in transmigration was observed at 10 ng/ml of MCP-1 ; at this chemokine concentration the number of migrant cells was increased by almost sevenfold .
Some variation in absolute migration was observed between leucocytes from different donors , but the pattern of the chemotactic response remained consistent in each case .
Western analysis was used to assess changes in the tyrosine phosphorylation of PI 3-kinase caused by treatment of freshly isolated mononuclear leucocytes with MCP-l-for periods of up to 30 min .
It was found that the amount of phosphotyrosine on the blot at a position corresponding to PI 3-kinase increased markedly following treatment of the cells with MCP-1 at a concentration of 15 ng/ml .
Precise measurement of relative changes in the tyrosine phosphorylation of PI 3-kinase was performed by calculation of the densitometric ratio of bands following serial labelling of phosphotyrosine and PI 3-kinase .
Figure 3 shows that the tyrosine phosphorylation of PI 3-kinase was increased after incubation of the cells with MCP-1 for 2:5 min and reached a maximal 1-6-fold increase after incubation for 10 min ; after 20 min the proportion of phosphotyrosine decreased .
Treatment of mononuclear leucocytes with medium conditioned by MLR supernatant-activated endothelial cells also caused an increase in the proportion of phosphotyrosine in PI 3-kinase .
This was maximal after 15 min and reached a level 1-8 times greater than that in resting cells .
A series of experiments was performed to determine whether heparin could directly antagonize the activity of MCP-1 .
It was found that pretreatment of MCP -1 with heparin resulted in a 66 % blockade of the potential MCP -- mediated increase in tyrosine phosphorylation of leucocyte PI 3-kinase ( Fig .
4a ) ; beparin alone had no effect on the resting level of phosphotyrosine in PI 3-kinase .
A similar antagonism of this MCP-1 activity was not produced by the addition of CS-C .
These results were paralleled by the observation that heparin pre-treated MCP-1 did not stimulate mononuclear cell migration across endothelial cell monolayers to a greater extent than normal culture medium ( Fig .
4b ) .
As with the PI 3-kinase data , CS-C had no effect on the migration-promoting activity of MCP-1 .
The medium conditioned by endothelial cells which had 516 M. S. Douglas et al .
0 17 7 fo | z 1-6 - 7 5 15 4 2 .
‘ l'4T ts | 2 o 1 & 9 I g. 12 .
& 10 i 1D 121 ¢ , LA H H UH U U 0 25 5 10 20 30 Length of stimulation time ( min ) Figure 3 .
The tyrosine phosphorylation of PI 3-kinase at increasing time-points following stimulation of mononuclear leucocytes with MCP-1 .
Densitometric analysis of Western blots revealed changes in the relative proportion of phosphotyrosine residues in PI 3-kinase following stimulation with MCP-1 for 0 , 2:5 , 5 , 10 , 20 and 30 min .
These representative results are from one of three similar experiments .
been pre-activated by treatment with an MLR supernatant stimulated a mean 2-9-fold increase in mononuclear cell transendothelial migration ( P < 0-03 ) .
Addition of heparin to the conditioned medium reduced this migratory response by 85 % ; CS-C had no effect on the enhanced mononuclear cell migration .
DISCUSSION The cultured cells displayed morphological features of endothelium and were shown to express a characteristic range of endothelial cell markers .
Routine culture was performed in heparin-free medium in order to prevent carry-over and potential interference with the assays of cytokine function .
It has already been established clearly that low concentrations of heparin can antagonize the capacity of IFN-y to induce endothelial class II MHC antigens and to up-regulate the expression of ICAM-1 . ``
Signal transduction from the specific IFN-y receptor complex involves rapid phosphorylation of STAT-1 and a more gradual increase in the level of intracellular STAT-1 expression . ``
STAT-1 exists as splice-variant a- and B-isoforms which have characteristic molecular weights of 91 and 84 kDa , respectively .
As with most cells , `` the endothelial cells used in the current study contained significantly more STAT-l « than the B-isoform .
Phosphorylated STAT-1 forms a dimer which migrates to the nucleus and activates transcription by binding to an IFN-y-activated sequence of DNA . ``
The ICAM-1 gene is known to contain such a sequence that can stimulate rapid up-regulation of expression , but the more gradual induction of class II MHC antigens by IFN-y is thought to be dependent on an increase in the level of STAT-1 .
* The observation that addition of heparin to IFN-y blocks the activation of STAT-1 is consistent with previous reports that heparin antagonizes the capacity of IFN-y for up-regulation of endothelial ICAM-1 expression `` and for the induction of class II MHC antigens . '
'' `` `` This supports the ( a ) .0 © o 157 8 14 !
F 7 14 § | co 3 I m - 123 29 2 2 1741 1 a .
8 | % E= 10 +~- -- - ~~~ Ab- -- - - - ~Wh l= - cos 2 -- a -_ I| FA FA 1221 i .LA _ WH ___A UZ C Medium MCP-1 MCP-1+ _ MCP-1+ heparin CS-C Treatment of PBMC ( b ) C 257 tJ C $ 20 A 3 0 o 154 2 < ® & 1-0 + -- rriwmm -- -- -- GWife c- -- - > -- - -- -- -5 F o 5 05 E 2 o i- I I I T Medium MCP-1 MCP-1+ _ MCP-1+ heparin CS-C Migratory stimulus Figure 4 .
Effect of mixture of MCP-1 with GAGs on mononuclear leucocyte activation and transendothelial migration .
( a ) Relative proportion of phosphotyrosine residues in mononuclear cell PI 3-kinase following treatment with MCP-1 , MCP-1 mixed with heparin , and MCP-1 mixed with CS-C ; these representative results are from one of three similar experiments .
( b ) Transendothelial migration of mononuclear leucocytes stimulated with MCP-1 , MCP-1 mixed with heparin , and MCP-1 mixed with CS-C. Each point represents the mean of triplicate determinations ; error bars show the SEM .
notion that heparin binds to IFN-y and inhibits normal sequestration onto the endothelial cell surface ; * `` this prevents interaction with the specific receptor and initiation of the signal transduction pathway .
The production of MCP-1 is increased by a wide range of specific and non-specific stimuli ; * `` most of these effects are mediated by increases in gene transcription following binding of proteins such as nuclear factor-xB .
`` ° The up-regulation of MCP-1 production by HLE cells following stimulation by IFN-y is consistent with results from a previous study of microvascular endothelial cells . ``
Study of the effect of GAG molecules on this activity of IFN-y showed that the related molecules heparin and HS were antagonistic but the structurally dissimilar GAG , CS-C had no effect on MCP-1 up-regulation .
This is consistent with previous studies which show that CS-C neither binds IFN-y ( MSD/JAK , unpublished observations ) nor inhibits the binding of this cytokine ©1997 Blackwell Science Ltd , Immunology , 92 , 512-518 Modulation of cytokines by heparin 517 to endothelial cells . ``
The concentration of heparin required to block 50 % of the MCP-1 response to high-dose IFN-y is similar to the plasma concentration of greater than 10 ug/ml that can be attained easily after intravenous heparin injection . ``
'' During the MLR , allospecific T cells produce a range of proinflammatory cytokines , including IFN-y and tumour necrosis factor- « ( TNF- « ) ; *° these cytokines stimulated HLE cells to increase production of MCP-1 .
Unlike the induction of class II MHC antigens , which requires chronic cytokine stimulation , `` the production of MCP was maintained following removal of the MLR conditioned medium .
Addition of heparin to the MLR supernatant did not affect the enhanced production of MCP-1 by stimulated endothelial cells .
This is consistent with the observation that TNF-4 , which is known to augment MCP-1 production by endothelial cells , `` `` is not inhibited by heparin . ``
Mononuclear cell migration assays showed that the concentration of chemotactic cytokines generated by stimulation of HLE cells with MLR supernatants was sufficient to stimulate a markedly increased passage of leucocytes across confluent endothelial cell monolayers ; this chemotactic activity was inhibited by the addition of heparin-like GAGs .
This observation is consistent with functional blockade of heparin-binding chemotactic molecules of endothelial origin , such as MCP-1 , by a mechanism analogous to that proposed for IFN-y .
Variation in the overall chemotactic response to MCP-1 observed in different experiments is consistent with previous reports and may reflect leucocyte subset variation between donors or perhaps inter-donor differences in chemokine receptor expression . ``
'' Treatment of T cells with the chemokine RANTES produces an increase in the kinase activity of immunoprecipit-ated PI 3-kinase .
`` ° PI 3-kinase is a heterodimer consisting of 85000 and 110000 subunits .
The regulatory 85 000 MW component can interact with many receptors and is known to undergo tyrosine phosphorylation during stimulation by a range of cytokines , `` `` but the relationship between this phosphorylation and changes in catalytic activity is unclear .
In the current study it was shown that PI 3-kinase phosphorylation reached a maximal level after mononuclear cell stimulation with MCP-1 for 10 min ; this is similar to the time-course reported for the increase in PI 3-kinase activity following stimulation with RANTES .
*° It has been reported that both IFN-y `` and members of the chemokine family© contain polycationic sequence domains which bind to negatively charged heparin and HS molecules .
It is known that sequestration of IFN-y by cell-surface HS is necessary for full biological activity of this cytokine . ``
Further studies indicate that a similar process plays a role in the function of B-chemokines such as MIP-1 , * `` RANTES , and of the « -chemokine IP-10 . ``
'' Direct binding studies have been hindered by spontaneous chemokine aggregation . ``
Significantly , it has been demonstrated that soluble heparin can inhibit the pro-adhesive function of RANTES and MIP-1 B but , paradoxically , the activity of the « -chemokine , IL-8 is enhanced by the presence of this GAG .
*° In the current study it was shown that heparin inhibited the activity of IFN-y and prevented signal transduction from the membrane-associated receptor complex .
Amongst the effects of IFN-y that are blocked is the normal up-regulation of MCP-1 production by microvascular endothelial cells .
It ©1997 Blackwell Science Ltd , Immunology , 92 , 512-518 was also shown that mixture of heparin and MCP-1 prior to incubation with mononuclear leucocytes effectively antagonized the tyrosine phosphorylation of PI 3-kinase produced by MCP-1 alone ; the non-cytokine binding GAG , CS-C had no effect on this activity of MCP-1 .
The results of these experiments were paralleled by those from studies of the effect of adding GAGs to MCP-1 in mononuclear cell transendothelial migration assays that also demonstrated an inhibitory effect that was specific for heparin .
These data support the notion that activation of PI 3-kinase during MCP-1 signal transduction is a necessary requirement for effective leucocyte activation .
This is consistent with the results of previous studies which show that MCP-1 can costimulate T-cell proliferation , * `` and that blockade of the activity of PI 3-kinase with the fungal metabolite , wortmannin inhibits both T-cell costimulation*® and the normal T-cell chemotactic response induced by RANTES . ``
Additional experiments showed that heparin could also inhibit the chemotactic activity of factors , including MCP-1 , that are released by endothelial cells that have been activated by the proinflammatory cytokines produced by specific , antigen-activated T lymphocytes .
These results may help to explain the basis for the immunosuppressive activity of heparin that has been observed in vivo .
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors are grateful to Drs Lise Binderup and Anni Larnkjaer of Leo Pharmaceutical Products Ltd , Copenhagen , Denmark for the kind provision of heparan sulphate .
This work was supported by grants from the British Heart Foundation and the Northern Counties Kidney Research Fund .
REFERENCES 1 .
FaRRAR M.A .
& ScHriEBER R.D .
( 993 ) The molecular cell biology of interferon-y and its receptor .
Annu Rev Immunol 11 , 571 .
2 .
Savace C.O.S .
, Hugxes C.C.W .
, McintyrE B.W .
, Picarp J.K. & Poser J.S .
( 1993 ) Human CD4* T cells proliferate to HLA-DR * allogeneic vascular endothelium .
Transplantation 56 , 128 .
3 .
Poser J.S .
, GIMBRONE M.A .
, LAPIERRE L.A. et al .
( 1986 ) Overlapping patterns of activation of human endothelial cells by interleukin 1 , tumor necrosis factor , and immune interferon .
J Immunol 137 , 1893 .
4 .
Lee Y.-J .
& Benveniste EN .
( 1996 ) Statla expression is involved in IFN-y induction of the class II transactivator and class II MHC genes .
J Immunol 157 , 1559 .
5 .
KJELLEN L. & LinpakL U .
( 1991 ) Proteoglycans : structures and interactions .
Annu Rev Biochem 60 , 443 .
6 .
Witt D.P .
& LanpeR A.D. ( 1994 ) Differential binding of chemokines to glycosaminoglycan subpopulations .
Curr Biol 4 , 394 .
7 .
Riper C.C .
( 1993 ) Many cytokines and interleukins bind to glycosaminoglycans .
Immunol Today 14 , 615 .
8 .
Lantz M. , THyset H. , Niusson E. & Orsson I .
( 1991 ) On the binding of tumour necrosis factor ( TNF ) to heparin and the release in vivo of the TNF-binding protein I by heparin .
J Clin Invest 88 , 2026 .
9 .
Lortat-Jacos H. & Grimaup J.A .
( 1992 ) Binding of interferon-gamma to heparan sulfate is restricted to the heparin-like domains and involves carboxylic - but not N-sulfated - groups .
Biochim Biophys Acta 1117 , 126 .
10 .
KoruipaRa L.V.P .
, Preass H.C.C .
, TaytoR® R.M.R .
, ForsytaE J.LR .
, Proup G. & Kirsy J.A .
( 1994 ) Cultured endothelium : 518 11 .
12 .
13 .
14 .
15 .
16 .
17 .
18 .
19 .
20 .
21 .
22 .
23 .
24. heparin antagonises the induction of Class II molecules by interferon-y .
Transplantation 58 , 1426 .
Rix D.A .
, DouaLas M.S .
, TacBot D. , DARK J.H .
& KirBy J.A .
( 1996 ) Role of glycosaminoglycans in regulation of the immunogenicity of human vascular endothelial cells .
Clin Exp Immuno !
104 , 60 .
W. , NockemaNnNn S. , GutscHeE M. & Hapoms U .
( 1995 ) Heparin inhibits the antiparasitic and immune modulatory effects of human recombinant interferon-y .
Eur J Immunol 25 , 688 .
Lmer O. , BAHARAYV E. , MEkoRI Y.A .
et al .
( 1989 ) Suppression of experimental autoimmune diseases and prolongation of allograft survival by treatment of animals with low doses of heparins .
J Clin Invest 83 , 752 .
Lacopzmskt Z. , GoRsKI A .
& Wasik M. ( 1990 ) Immunosuppressive action of low-dose heparin : effect on skin allograft survival .
Transplantation 50 , 714 .
Aziz S. , Tapa Y. , Gorpon D. , McDonaLp T.O .
, FarEED J .
& Verrier ED .
( 1993 ) A reduction in accelerated graft coronary disease and an improvement in cardiac allograft survival using low molecular weight heparin in combination with cyclosporine .
J Heart Lung Transplant 12 , 634 .
FULLER L. , CARRENO M. , EsqUENAZI V. et al ( 1994 ) Characterization of anti-canine cytokine monoclonal antibodies specific for IFN-y : Effect of anti-IFN-y on renal transplant rejection .
Tissue Antigens 43 , 163 .
HAaLLORAN P.F .
, Goes N. , URmsoN J. et a/ .
( 1997 ) MHC expression in organ transplants : lessons from the knock-out mice .
Transplant Proc 29 , 1041 .
ApaMs D.H. & Ltoyp A.R .
( 1997 ) Chemokines : leucocyte recruitment and activation cytokines .
Lancet 349 , 490 .
Brown Z. , GERRITSEN ME .
, Carey W.W. , StRiETER RM .
, KuNKEL S.L .
& Wesrwick J .
( 1994 ) Chemokine gene expression and secretion by cytokine-activated human - microvascular endothelial cells .
Am J Pathol 145 , 913 .
TURNER L. , Waro S.G. & Westwick J .
( 1995 ) RANTES-activated human T lymphocytes : a role for phosphoinositide 3-kinase .
J Immunol 155 , 2437 .
WiLsoN J.L .
, Cunningham A.C. & KirBy J.A .
( 1995 ) Alloantigen presentation by B cells : analysis of the requirement for B cell activation .
Immunology 86 , 325 .
DARNELL J.E.J .
, Kerr LM .
& Stark G.R .
( 1994 ) Jak-STAT pathways and transcriptional activation in response to IFNs and other extracellular signaling proteins .
Science 264 , 1415 .
ScHmipLer U. , Wu P. , RotHE M. , Brasseur M. & McKnight S.L .
( 1995 ) Components of a Stat recognition code : evidence for two layers of molecular selectivity .
Immunity 2 , 689 .
DoustLas M.S .
, Rix D.A .
, Dark J.H .
, TarBot D. & KirBy J.A .
( 1997 ) Examination of the mechanism by which heparin antagonizes activation of a model endothelium by interferon-gamma ( IFN-y ) .
Clin Exp Immunol 107 , 578 .
25 26 .
27 .
28 .
29 .
30 .
31 .
32 .
33 .
34 .
35 .
36 .
37 .
38 .
M. S. Douglas et al .
.
Proost P. , WuYTs A .
& van Damme J .
( 1996 ) Human monocyte chemotactic proteins-2 and -3 : structural and functional comparison with MCP-1 .
J Leukocyte Biol 59 , 67 .
Brown Z. , Rosson R.L .
& Westwick J .
( 1996 ) Regulation and expression of chemokines : potential role in glomerulonephritis .
J Leukocyte Biol 59 , 75 .
KuLraANE A. , EKrE H.P .
, PERLMANN P. , RomBo L. , WaHLGREN M. & Warum B .
( 1992 ) Effect of different fractions of heparin on Plasmodium falciparum merozoite invasion of red blood cells in vitro .
Am J Trop Med Hyg 46 , 589 .
Danzer S $ .G .
, Kircmner H. & RmK L. ( 1994 ) Cytokine interactions in human mixed lymphocyte culture .
Transplantation 57 , 1638 .
Qm S. , LaRosa G. , CaMPBELL J.J. et al .
( 1996 ) Expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 and interleukin-8 receptors on subsets of T cells : correlation with transendothelial chemotactic potential .
Eur J Immunol 26 , 640 .
KaPELLER R. & Cantey LC .
( 1994 ) Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase .
BioEssays 16 , 565 .
Lortat-Jacos H. & Grimaup J.A .
( 1991 ) Interferon-y binds to heparan sulphate by a cluster of amino acids located in the C-terminal part of the molecule .
FEBS Letters 280 , 152 .
Lortat-Jacos H. , TurnNBuLL J.E .
& Grimaup J.A .
( 1995 ) Molecular organization of the interferon-y-binding domain in heparan sulphate .
Biochem J 310 , 497 .
TANAKA Y. , Apams D.H. , HusscHer S. , Hirano H. , Stesenust U .
& S. ( 1993 ) T-cell adhesion induced by proteoglycan-immobilized cytokine MIP-1f .
Nature 361 , 79 .
Gat D. , R. , MEkor1 Y.A .
, Viopavsky I .
& Liner O .
( 1994 ) Regulation of adhesion of CD4* T Lymphocytes to intact or heparinase treated subendothelial matrix by diffusible or anchored RANTES or MIP-1 $ 6 .
J Immunol 153 , 4899 .
LUusTER A.D. , GREENBERG S.M .
& Leper P. ( 1995 ) The IP-10 chemokine binds to a specific cell surface heparan sulfate site shared with platelet factor 4 and inhibits endothelial cell prolifer-ation .
J Exp Med 182 , 219 .
Wess M.C .
, Enrenoruser M.U .
, Crark-Lewis L. , BagatoLmt M & Rot A .
( 1993 ) Binding to heparan sulphate or heparin enhances neutrophil responses to interleukin 8 .
Proc Nat !
Acad Sci USA 90 , 7158 .
Taus D.D .
, Turcovski-CoRRALEs S.M .
, Key ML .
, Longo D.L .
& MurpHvy W.J .
( 1996 ) Chemokines and T lymphocyte action .
1 .
Beta chemokines costimulate human T lymphocyte activation in vitro .
J Immunol 156 , 2095 .
Taus D.D .
, MurpHy W.J .
, Asar O. et al ( 1997 ) Induction of alloantigen-specific Tcell tolerance through the treatment of human T lymphocytes with wortmannin .
J Immunol !
158 , 2745 .
©1997 Blackwell Science Ltd , Immunology , 92 , 512-518
