Immunology 1998 93 350-357 Kinetics of cytokine and NFAT gene expression in human interleukin-2-dependent T lymphoblasts stimulated via T-cell receptor T. SARENEVA , * S. MATIKAINEN , * J. VANHATALO , * K. MELEN , * J. PELKONENt & I. JULKUNEN* *Department of Virology , Laboratory of Viral and Molecular Immunology , National Public Health Institute , Helsinki , and { Department of Clinical Microbiology , University of Kuopio , Kuopio , Finland SUMMARY T cells respond to mitogenic or antigenic stimulation by proliferation and by turning on cytokine gene expression .
Here we have analysed the kinetics and nature of cytokine production in human peripheral blood-derived T lymphoblasts stimulated with anti-CD3 antibodies or Lens culinaris lectin ( LCL ) .
T cells were purified from peripheral blood mononuclear cells ( PBMC ) and primarily activated with anti-CD3 antibodies and cultured in the presence of interleukin-2 ( IL-2 ) .
Anti-CD3-restimulated T cells ( mainly CD8 * ) produced IL-2 , interferon-y ( IFN-y ) and tumour necrosis factor- « ( TNF-4 ) and low levels of IL-4 and IL-10 transcripts and proteins .
No IL-6 gene expression was observed .
In LCL-stimulated cells the cytokine production pattern was very similar .
Steady-state mRNA levels of IL-2 , IL-10 and IFN-y peaked at 3 hr after anti-CD3 stimulation and declined rapidly thereafter .
The kinetics of TNF-x mRNA expression was faster , being at its peak level 1 hr after stimulation .
Anti-CD3-stimulated IL-2 gene expression was down-regulated by protein synthesis inhibitor , whereas IL-10 , IFN-y and TNF- « genes were readily induced independent of ongoing protein synthesis .
T-cell receptor stimulation also induced a very rapid expression of c-jun , c-fos and NFATcl ( NFATc ) genes , the gene products of which are involved in cytokine gene expression .
In conclusion , the cytokines synthesized by IL- 2-dependent T cells were predominantly IL-2 , IFN-y and TNF- « .
INTRODUCTION T cells are important regulators of immune responses in vivo .
T-cell activation is specified by T-cell receptor complex ( TCR-CD3 ) , which upon interaction with antigen-presenting major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) molecules results in the activation of T-cell effector functions , such as cytokine production and cytolytic activity . ``
T cells can be divided into functionally distinct subpopulations , namely cytotoxic CD8 * and CD4* T helper cells T helper cells can further be subdivided into T helper type 1 ( Th1 ) and Th2 cells based on their characteristic cytokine expression profiles .
`` ~° Cytokines , which are essential in directing the immune response towards cell-mediated - immunity , - include Thl-type - cytokines interleukin-2 ( IL-2 ) and interferon-y ( IFN-y ) .
Th2-type cytokines IL-4 , IL-5 , IL-6 and IL-10 enhance and support humoral Received 23 September 1997 ; revised 30 November 1997 ; accepted 30 November 1997 .
Abbreviations : AP-1 , activated protein 1 ; CHX , cycloheximide ; CsA , cyclosporin A ; GAPDH , glyceraldehyde phosphate dehydrogen-ase ; LCL , Lens culinaris lectin ; NFAT , nuclear factor of activated T cells ; PBMC , peripheral blood mononuclear cells ; RT-PCR , reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction .
Correspondence : Dr T. Sareneva , National Public Health Institute , Mannerheimintie 166 , FIN-00300 Helsinki , Finland .
immune responses as well as they counteract the activating effects of IL-2 and IFN-y on cell-mediated immunity . ``
Activated CD8 * cells produce IFN-y preferentially but some subsets have been demonstrated to be able to produce Th2-type cytokines as well .
`` * Since CD8* T cells are already active early in infection , their role in directing specific immune responses is potentially very important . ``
At present , there is no detailed view of the quality , quantity and kinetics of cytokine production in activated human CD8 * T cells .
Analysis of T-cell signalling has been under active investigation for several years .
T-cell receptor stimulation activates several signal transduction pathways including ras , protein kinase C and calcineurin , followed by activation of nuclear factor ( NF ) -xB , nuclear factor of activated T cells ( NFAT ) , and activated protein-1 ( AP-1 ) transcription factors . ``
'' These transcription factors are involved in initiating the transcription of several cytokine genes , such as IL-2 , IL-4 , granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor ( GM-CSF ) , tumour necrosis factor- « ( TNF-4 ) and IFN-y . ``
In this study we have characterized the cytokine expression profiles in human peripheral blood-derived , predominantly CD8 * , T lymphoblasts .
Cytokine gene expression in anti-CD3 antibody-stimulated or LCL-stimulated cells was analysed by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction ( RT-PCR ) , and Northern blotting as well as at the level of ©1998 Blackwell Science Ltd Cytokine gene expression in T lymphocytes 351 protein production .
We observed that T lymphoblasts produced preferentially IL-2 , IFN-y and TNF-4 and minimal amounts of IL-4 and IL-10 .
In addition , a strong upregulation of c-jun , c-fos and NFATcl mRNA expression was seen , which is likely to contribute to the efficient induction of cytokine gene expression in T cells .
MATERIALS AND METHODS Reagents Anti-CD3 [ American Type Culture Collection ( ATCC ) CRL 8001 ] antibody-containing ascites fluid was kindly provided by Dr M. Kaartinen ( Haartman Institute , University of Helsinki , Helsinki , Finland ) .
Phorbol 12-myristate-13-acetate ( PMA ; 10 ng/ml ) was obtained from Sigma Chemical Co. ( St. Louis , MO ) and Lens culinaris lectin ( LCL ; 10 ug/ml ) from the Finnish Red Cross Blood Transfusion Service ( Helsinki , Finland ) .
Cell isolation and culture Leucocyte-rich buffy coats were obtained from healthy blood donors ( Finnish Red Cross Blood Transfusion Service ) .
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells ( PBMC ) were isolated by Ficoll-Paque ( Pharmacia Biotechnology , Uppsala , Sweden ) density centrifugation .
After washing , most of the adherent cells ( monocytes ) were removed by binding to plastic plates ( Falcon Multiwell , Becton Dickinson , Franklin Lakes , NJ ) for 1 hr at 37° .
Non-adherent cells were collected and further purified by passing them through nylon wool columns .
Purified T cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium containing 10 % fetal calf serum ( FCS ) ( Integro , Zaandam , the Netherlands ) , 20mm HEPES buffer , 2mM - L-glutamine , penicillin ( 0-6 ug/ml ) , and streptomycin ( 60 ug/ml ) .
T cells were activated on tissue culture plates precoated with an optimal dilution of anti-CD3 antibody-containing ascites fluid in the presence of recombinant human IL-2 ( 100 U/ml ; Aldesleukin , Chiron Corp. , Emeryville , CA ) for 1 week .
After this , IL-2-containing fresh media was added at 3-5-day intervals .
To gain more information on the proliferation of different T-cell types we collected cell samples at 10-day intervals and analysed them on a fluorescence-activated cell sorter ( FACScan ) .
T cells were stained with a mixture of both fluorescein- and phycoer-ythrin-conjugated monoclonal antibodies against various blood cell markers .
Antibody panels specific for CD14/45 , CD3/4 , CD3/8 , CD3/19 , CD3/16 +56 , CD4/8 molecules and isotype control IgG1l/IgG2a antibodies labelled with fluor-escein and phycoerythrin , respectively , were used .
Cell samples were analysed by flow cytometry as recommended by the manufacturer ( FACScan flow cytometer , Becton Dickinson , Mountain View , CA ) using SimulSet , version 1.1 and CellQuest , version 1.2. software programs .
Initially , CD4* cells formed the majority , but during the follow-up studies the cellular population changed towards the CD8 * subtype .
At 10 days after anti-CD3/IL-2 stimulation the cell population was approximately 70 % CD8 and 30 % CD4 .
At later times there was a clear overgrowth of CD8 * cells and over 90 % of the cells were of the CD8 * subtype after 30 days of cultivation .
At this stage the cells were used in all experiments .
Quantification of cytokine mRNA by RT-PCR Relative cytokine mRNA levels were determined by quantitative RT-PCR assay .
Two micrograms of total RNA and ©1998 Blackwell Science Ltd , Immunology , 93 , 350-357 1:75 nmol of random primer were mixed in a volume of 18 pl , heated to 65° for 5 min and placed on ice .
After addition of 5 ul of 5 x RT buffer ( 350mm KCI , 50 mm MgCl , , and 250 mm Tris-HCI , pH 8-3 , 1 ul of dNTP ( 10 mm each ) and 1 ul ( 5U ) of avian myeloblastosis virus reverse transcriptase ( Promega , Madison , WI ) , samples were incubated at 42° for 1 hr .
The enzyme was inactivated by adding 25 ul of TE ( 10 mm Tris-HCl , lmm EDTA , pH 8:0 ) and heating the sample to 70° for 5 min .
PCR amplification was carried out in a volume of 50 pul with 0-2 mm dNTP , 0-3 um of primers , 1 U of Taq polymerase ( Dynazyme II , Finnzymes , Espoo , Finland ) and a standard buffer supplemented with 1-5 mm MgCl , , .
The amount of cytokine-specific cDNA was quantified in two steps to increase the sensitivity of the assay .
First , cDNA samples ( 1 ul/reaction ) were amplified for 15 cycles with cytokine-specific primer pairs .
Second , 3 ul of this amplification product was divided into five tubes containing a decreasing amount of multi-specific plasmid DNA and the second round of the PCR amplification was carried out with the same cytokine-specific primer pairs .
Plasmid DNA was L. sooog— C is G ifn-y | 4000 ~ I nro 3000 |- __ 2000 E s | | E 1000 |- | 2 [ | ‘ e § , L e O wre N W 3 6 © £0 | s | € | - GU ice = 150 | < G is & T W 1-40 | | | 100 |- H7 P | ] 50 |- | | 0 ( 1 Ci mmm L_ | cas o 3 3 Time after anti-CD3 stimulation ( hr ) Figure 1 .
Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of cytokine mRNA expression in anti-CD3-stimulated T cells .
T cells obtained from healthy blood donors were stimulated with immobilized anti-CD3 antibodies and grown in the presence of IL-2 for 4 weeks .
T cells were left unstimulated ( 0 hr ) or were restimulated with anti-CD3 antibodies followed by collection of the cells at 1 hr and 3 hr after the stimulation .
Total cellular RNA was isolated and the relative quantities of different cytokine transcripts were determined by RT-PCR as described in the Materials and Methods .
The data represents the mean ( + SD ) of three separate experiments .
Cytokine mRNA levels were standardized according to corresponding B , -microglobulin mRNA levels .
352 T. Sareneva et al .
Time after stimulation ( hr ) LCL Anti-CD3 € IL-2 mRNA € IL-10 mRNA < < -- IFN-y mRNA < L TNF-a mRNA m « -- @ * DPCP -- Figure 2 .
Kinetics of IL-2 , IL-10 , IFN-y and TNF- « mRNA expression in T cells .
T lymphoblasts from two different donors were separately stimulated with anti-CD3 or LCL .
The cells were collected at the time-points indicated , pooled and total cellular RNA was isolated .
RNA ( 20 ug ) was size-fractionated in formaldehyde-agarose gel electrophoresis and subjected to Northern blot analysis with a *°P-labelled fragment of IL-2 , IL-10 , IFN-y , TNF- « and GAPDH cDNA probes .
used in fivefold dilutions starting from 0-2 ng ( for IL-2 , IL-4 , IL-6 and TNF-q ) or 5-0 ng ( for IL-10 , IFN-y and B ; , -microglo-bulin ) .
Sequences of the multi-specific plasmids , their use in cDNA quantification and the primer sequences were as described previously . ``
'' A similar quantification of B , -microglobulin expression was used to correct the variation in the cDNA synthesis .
In order to optimize the linear range of amplification in the first round of PCR , all the cDNA samples were diluted 1-100 for the amplification of B , -microglobulin-specific pri-mers .
Similarly , 1-hr and 3-hr cDNA samples were diluted 1-100 for the amplification with IFN-y- and IL-10-specific primer pairs , whereas RT-PCR for other cytokines was done in undiluted cDNA samples .
RNA isolation and analysis Total cellular RNA was prepared from the pooled cell samples obtained from two or three individual blood donors using the guanidinium isothiocyanate-caesium chloride method .
'* `` `` Equal amounts ( 20 ug ) of the total cellular RNA was size-fractionated in 1 % formaldehyde-agarose gel electrophoresis , transferred to nylon membranes ( Hybond , Amersham , Buckinghamshire , UK ) and subjected to Northern blotting analysis with *°P-labelled cDNA probes .
The cDNAs used as probes were human IL-2 , `` IL-4 , IL-6 , IL-10 ( obtained from DNAX Laboratories , Palo Alto , CA ) , IFN-y `` and TNF- « ( ATCC ) .
NFATcl ( NFATc ) , NFATc2 ( NFATp ) , NFATc3 ( NFAT4 ) cDNAs `` were kindly provided by Dr G. Grabtree ( Stanford University , CA ) , and c-jun , and c-fos genes were obtained from Dr R. Bravo ( Bristol-Myers Squib , Princeton , NJ ) .
For controlling equal RNA loading , ethidium bromide staining and Northern blot analysis with glyceraldehyde phosphate dehydrogenase ( GAPDH ) and B-actin'* ' cDNA probes were used in the assays .
Cytokine determinations IL-2 , IL-4 , IL-10 , IFN-y and TNF-4 levels in cell culture supernatants were measured using enzyme-linked immuno-sorbent asay ( ELISA ) kits from R & D Systems ( Abingdon , UK ) .
Cycloheximide and cyclosporin A treatment To inhibit cellular protein synthesis during anti-CD3 stimulation , the cells were treated with cycloheximide ( CHX ; Sigma ) at 10 ug/ml for 30 min prior stimulation and the inhibitor was kept present throughout the experiment .
This concentration of CHX is sufficient to block fully all protein synthesis in leucocytes .
`` ° Cyclosporin A ( CsA ; Sandoz Pharma Ag , Basel , ©1998 Blackwell Science Ltd , Immunology , 93 , 350-357 r TTT ] 10000 r run T 1000 ror rm ] 100 Cytokine concentration ( pg/ml ) experiments .
Cytokine gene expression in T lymphocytes 353 LCL E Anti-CD3 - IFN-y R TNF-a E m 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 Stimulation time ( hr ) Figure 3 .
Kinetics of IL-2 , IL-4 , IL-10 , IFN-y and TNF- « protein production in T cells .
Cell culture supernatants from LCL- and anti-CD3-stimulated T cells were collected at the times indicated .
Cytokine levels were determined using commercial ELISA kits , and the kinetics and quantity of cytokine secretion are shown .
Each time-point represents the mean ( + SD ) of three separate cytokine mRNA and protein expression in - anti Switzerland ) was used at 10 ug/ml to block the calcineurin-dependent activation pathways . ``
RESULTS Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of cytokine gene expression in T cells We concentrated on analysis of the cytokine mRNA expression at early times after T-cell stimulation .
Quantitative RT-PCR analyses carried out in three separate experiments revealed a reproducible pattern of cytokine gene expression .
In unstimulated cells , detectable levels of IL-2 , IL-4 , IL-10 , IFN-y and mRNA were seen by RT-PCR .
One hour after anti-CD3-stimulation , a several hundred-fold increase in IL-2 , IFN-y and TNF- « mRNA levels was observed , whereas the up-regulation of IL-4 and IL-10 gene expression was more modest ( Fig .
1 ) .
At 3 hr after anti-CD3 treatment the cytokine mRNA levels was further up-regulated , with the exception of TNF- « whos .
mRNA expression remained similar to that recorded at 1 hr .
No basal or inducible IL-6 mRNA expression was seen .
Kinetics of cytokine mRNA expression and protein production in T cells To have a better insight into the kinetics of cytokine gene expression in T cells we analysed the time-course of both ©1998 Blackwell Science Ltd , Immunology , 93 , 350-357 CD3-stimulated and LCL-stimulated cells Comparison of LCL-stimulated cells to those of anti-CD3-stimulated cells revealed differences in the kinetics of cytokine mRNA expression .
Both inducers readily enhanced the expression of different cytokine genes .
Northern blot analyses of LCL-stimulated cells revealed that the steady-state mRNA levels for IL-2 and especially for IL-10 were found at later times after the stimulation , at 3 hr and 16 hr , respectively .
IFN-y and TNF- « mRNA expression , instead , peaked at 1 hr after induction ( Fig .
2 ) .
In anti-CD3-stimulated cells IL-2 expression was similar to that in LCL-stimulated cells .
IL-10 mRNA expression peaked at the much earlier time-point of 3 hr , as did IFN-y mRNA expression .
mRNA expression was very fast and showed almost identical kinetics of expression with both stimulators ( Fig .
2 ) .
IL-4 or IL-6 mRNA could not be visualized by Northern blotting .
This experiment was carried out three times with similar results .
In general , the Northern blot data were in accordance with the quantitative RT-PCR analysis presented in Fig .
1 .
Next we analysed T-cell cytokine production using quantitative ELISA assays .
As shown in Fig .
3 , the secretion of IFN-y , TNF- « and IL-2 was seen already at 1 hr after anti-CD3 antibody or LCL stimulation .
There was a clear time-dependent increase in the secretion of these cytokines and very 354 T. Sareneva et al .
high levels were reached within 6 hr after stimulation .
IL-4 and IL-10 secretion was also observed ( Fig .
3 ) , but their amounts were up to 100-1000-fold lower , as compared to other cytokines .
It is also noteworthy that IL-10 production continued to increase throughout the study period , suggesting a slower kinetics of synthesis and secretion .
Cytokine gene expression is activated in the absence of protein synthesis As there were clear differences in the kinetics of IL-2 , IL-10 , IFN-y and TNF- « gene expression in response to anti-CD3 stimulation , we wanted to analyse whether these genes were direct targets for T-cell receptor-activated transcriptional systems .
We treated T cells with CHX ( 10 ug/ml ) 30 min before anti-CD3 antibody stimulation or left them untreated and collected cells 1 , 2 and 3hr after the stimulation .
Northern blot analyses revealed that IL-2 gene expression was almost completely blocked in the presence of CHX ( Fig .
4 ) , whereas IL-10 , IFN-y and TNF-4 mRNA expression appeared to be independent of ongoing protein synthesis .
This suggests that all the other genes but IL-2 are under direct transcriptional control of T-cell receptor-activated transcriptional systems .
The gene for TNF- « behaved differently from the other genes since TNF- « mRNA levels appeared to be much higher , especially at 2 and 3 hr , in the presence of CHX as compared to untreated cells .
This may result from an mRNA stabilizing effect of CHX that has been suggested previously . ``
AP-1 and NFAT transcription factor gene expression is enhanced by T-cell receptor stimulation AP-1 and NFAT transcriptional systems have been suggested to take part in the regulation of several T-cell cytokine genes .
At least IL-2 , IL-4 and TNF-4 gene promoters contain elements that bind AP-1 and NFAT transcription factors . '
> * `` Therefore , we analysed whether AP-1 and NFAT transcription factor gene expression was activated by T-cell receptor stimulation .
We stimulated T cells with PMA and anti-CD3 antibodies and analysed the expression of c-jun , c-fos ( AP-1 proteins ) , and NFAT genes .
The levels of c-jun and c-fos mRNA were strongly up-regulated already at 1 hr with both inducers and their levels started to decrease thereafter ( Fig .
5 ) .
Anti-CD3 stimulation was a better inducer of c-fos gene expression than PMA whereas PMA induced c-jun gene Time after anti-CD3 stimulation ( hr ) Anti-CD3 -o 0 - + + CHX IL-2 mRNA IL-10 mRNA IFN-y mRNA Figure 4 .
Effect of protein synthesis inhibition on IL-2 , IL-10 , IFN-y and TNF-4 gene expression .
T cells were stimulated with anti-CD3 in the absence or presence of CHX ( 10 ug/ml ) .
The cells were collected at 1 , 2 and 3 hr after the stimulation , total RNA was isolated and mRNA expression levels were analysed by Northern blotting with *P-labelled cytokine-specific cDNA probes .
©1998 Blackwell Science Ltd , Immunology , 93 , 350-357 Cytokine gene expression in T lymphocytes 355 PMA Anti-CD3 , TNF-a *A C- mRNA snmp c-jun C- mRNA c-fos C- mRNA PMA Anti-CD3 O-l 10 2 3 1 2 3 - O-Il ( Hr ) NFATe1 gag wa C- mRNA Coombs .
me t rough NFATe2 e < -- on 's € NFATc3 mRNA 285 RNA 188 RNA Figure 5 .
Expression kinetics of IFN-y , TNF-4 , c-jun , c-fos and NFAT genes in anti-CD3- and PMA-stimulated T cells .
Total RNA was extracted from the stimulated T cells at the time-points indicated , and steady-state IFN-y , TNF-4 , c-jun , c-fos , NFATp , NFATc and NFAT3 mRNA levels were analysed by Northern blotting using 20 ug of total RNA hybridized with the respective cDNA probes .
more efficiently compared to anti-CD3 antibodies .
Northern blot analysis of NFAT mRNA expression revealed that in T cells the basal levels of NFATc2 and NFAc3 were relatively high , whereas the mRNA level for NFATcl was hardly detectable .
Stimulation of the cells with PMA resulted in a modest up-regulation of all analysed NFAT genes .
Anti-CD3 stimulation , instead , resulted in a very strong up-regulation of NFATcl gene expression .
Neither NFATc2 nor NFATc3 gene expression was activated , rather there was a clearly detectable decrease in - NFATc3 mRNA - expression - in - anti-CD3-stimulated cells 2-3 hr after the stimulation ( Fig .
5 ) .
Next we studied the effect of CsA , a known inhibitor of the calcineurin/NFAT pathway and an inhibitor of cytokine gene expression , `` on PMA- and anti-CD3 antibody-stimulated IL-2 and IFN-y gene expression .
PMA treatment of cells resulted in a modest induction of IFN-y gene expression , whereas no induction of IL-2 gene was seen .
PMA-induced IFN-y gene expression was partially inhibited by CsA .
Anti-CD3 antibody treatment of T cells resulted in a marked up-regulation of both IL-2 and IFN-y gene expression .
CsA very efficiently blocked this up-regulation ( Fig .
6 ) .
Since anti-CD3 antibody-induced IL-2 and IFN-y expression was inhibited by CsA , it is likely that the NFAT-mediated pathway is essential for the activation of these cytokine genes .
DISCUSSION Stimulation of T-cell receptor by specific antibodies has been an important experimental approach in understanding the ©1998 Blackwell Science Ltd , Immunology , 93 , 350-357 gene activation mechanisms in T cells .
`` * `` `` `` ' In the present work we used this approach to analyse the quality and quantity of cytokines produced by T cells obtained from PBMC after removal of adherent cells .
We stimulated T lymphocytes with anti-CD3 antibodies in the presence of IL-2 , which resulted in the proliferation of T cells in the absence of any specific antigen .
Within 4 weeks there was a clear overgrowth of T cells carrying CD8 antigen markers .
We concentrated on the analysis of cytokine gene expression profiles at early times after T-cell receptor stimulation .
The transcription of several cytokine genes including IL-2 IL-4 , IL-10 , IFN-y and TNF- « were rapidly turned on by anti-CD3 stimulation suggesting that they are direct target genes for transcriptional activation by T-cell receptor stimulation .
This concept was also supported by the fact that at least IL-10 , IFN-y and TNF-4 « genes ( Fig .
4 ) were also activated in the presence of CHX .
IL-2 gene expression , instead , seemed in a major part to be dependent on ongoing protein synthesis .
There were further certain differences in the kinetics of activation of different genes .
TNF-u gene expression was turned on very rapidly and the peak steady-state mRNA levels were observed 1 hr after stimulation .
Higher TNF- « mRNA levels were seen in CHX-treated cells , which may be due to a stabilizing effect of CHX on TNF- « mRNA . ``
The kinetics of expression of other cytokine mRNA was different from that of TNF- « .
The peak levels of IL-2 , IL-10 and IFN-y mRNA expression were observed 3 hr after T-cell receptor stimulation .
This may indicate a prolonged 356 T. Sareneva et al .
- + - - + - PMA - - + - - + Anti-CD3 - - - + + + Cyclosporin A < IL-2 mRNA IFN-WP | < - mona see asl B-actin < - lank Figure 6 .
Effect of CsA on IFN-y and TNF-4 « gene expression in PMA- and anti-CD3-stimulated T cells .
The cells were either left untreated or CsA was added for 30 min before the stimulation and was kept present throughout the experiment .
The cells were stimulated for 3 hr with PMA or anti-CD3 , and collected .
Total RNA was isolated and analysed by Northern blotting using probes specific for IFN-y , TNF- « and B-actin .
transcriptional activation of these genes , longer half-life of these mRNA compared to TNF- « mRNA or alternatively that some newly synthesized transcription factors would further enhance the transcription of these cytokine genes .
Efficient IL-2 gene expression was clearly dependent on ongoing protein synthesis , since in the presence of CHX only minor amounts of IL-2 mRNA were seen ( Fig .
4 ) .
Although genes for IL-10 and IFN-y were also turned on in the presence of CHX there was a further accumulation of these mRNA ( especially IFN-y ) at later time-points ( Figs 2 and 5 ) .
This may indicate a positive feedback system provided either by newly synthesized cytokines or by enhanced gene expression and activation of AP-1 and NFAT transcription factors .
Neither IFN-y , nor TNF- « appeared to take part in activating their own gene expression , since stimulation of T cells with pure preparations of IFN-y or TNF-4 did not result in enhanced IFN-y mRNA expression ( data not shown ) .
IL-2 , however , is capable of enhancing IFN-y production in T cells , `` `` and we can not rule out its role as a factor further enhancing IFN-y gene expression during the early hours after T-cell receptor stimulation .
Alternatively , the up-regulation of transcription factor gene expression is further enhancing the gene expression of IFN-y and other cytokines .
To address this question more directly , we studied the expression of c-jun , c-fos , NFATcl , NFATc2 and NFATc3 genes .
NFAT/AP-1 transcriptional systems regulate the expression of several T-cell cytokine genes , such as IL-2 , IL-4 and and are possibly also involved in the expression of the IFN-y gene . ``
There was a very strong and fast up-regulation of both c-jun and c-fos gene expression by anti-CD3 antibody stimulation .
Consistent with the up-regulation of c-jun and c-fos gene expression , AP-1 DNA-binding activity was also enhanced ( results not shown ) .
Kinetically the enhanced c-jun/c-fos gene expression matched the kinetics of enhanced expression of IL-2 , IL-10 and IFN-y mRNA , which were seen 3 hr after T-cell receptor stimulation .
NFATcl transcription factor gene expression was also strongly enhanced after anti-CD3 stimulation .
Practically no induction of NFATc2 or NFATc3 genes was seen .
These results are consistent with those obtained from Jurkat T cells stimulated with PMA and calcium ionophore `` or anti-CD16-stimulated NK cells .
`` ° Further evidence for the role of NFAT transcription factor in the transcriptional activation of IL-2 and IFN-y genes in T cells was obtained from experiments with CsA ( Fig .
6 ) , which clearly demonstrated a significant inhibition of anti-CD3 antibody-induced IL-2 and IFN-y gene expression .
Our results show that T-cell receptor stimulation not only activates several different transcriptional systems but also enhances the gene expression of AP-1 and NFAT transcription factors .
Both of these events are apparently important components in the regulation of the magnitude of cytokine gene expression in T cells .
This may be the case , especially for IL-2 gene expression which occurred efficiently only if the de novo protein synthesis was taking place .
In the present work we have demonstrated that human peripheral blood-derived T cells can be activated by non-antigenic stimulation to produce a number of different cytokines .
The main cytokines produced were IL-2 , IFN-y and TNF- « .
The production of IL-4 was very low , whereas IL-10 was produced in reasonable amounts .
However , the predominant cytokine produced was IFN-y which indicates a Thl-like cytokine profile in these cells .
T cells were initially obtained by IL-2/anti-CD3 stimulation , which may have driven them towards a Th1-like cellular differentiation .
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by grants from the Jenny and Antti Wihuri Foundation , the Finnish Foundation for Research on Viral Diseases , the Medical Research Council of the Academy of Finland , the Finnish Cancer Foundations , the Paulo Foundation and the Technology Development Centre of Finland ( TEKES ) .
REFERENCES 1 .
Heprick S.M .
& Eipetman FJ .
( 1993 ) T lymphocyte antigen receptors .
In : Fundamental Immunology ( ed .
W. E. Paul ) , 3rd edn , pp .
383-420 .
Raven Press , New York .
2 .
MosmanN TR .
, CHerwinsk1 H. , Bonp M.W .
, GiEpLm M.A .
& CorFMAN R.L .
( 1986 ) Two types of murine helper T cell clone .
I .
Definition according to profiles of lymphokine activities and secreted proteins .
J Immunol 136 , 2348 .
3 .
CHErwinskIt H.M. , Schumacher J.H .
, Brown K.D .
& MosmanN T.R .
( 1987 ) Two types of mouse helper T cell clone .
III .
Further differences in lymphokine synthesis between Thl and Th2 clones revealed by RNA hybridization , functionally monospecific bioas-says , and monoclonal antibodies .
J Exp Med 166 , 1229 .
4 .
Det PretE G.F. , pe CARLE M. , MastROMAURO C. et al .
( 1991 ) Purified protein derivative of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and excretory-secretory antigen ( s ) of Toxocara canis expand in vitro ©1998 Blackwell Science Ltd , Immunology , 93 , 350-357 10 .
11 .
12 .
13 .
16 .
17 .
18. .
Seper RA .
, BouLray J.-L. , FINKELMAN F. Cytokine gene expression human T cells with stable and opposite ( type 1 T helper or type 2 T helper ) profile of cytokine production .
J Clin Invest 88 , 346. .
Mosman TR .
& Sap S. ( 1996 ) The expanding universe of T-cell subsets : Th1 , Th2 and more .
Immunol Today 17 , 138. .
ABBAS A.K .
, MurpHuy K. & Suer A .
( 1996 ) Functional diversity of helper T lymphocytes .
Nature 383 , 787. et al .
( 1992 ) CD8 +T cells can be primed in vitro to produce IL-4 .
J Immunol 148 , 1652. .
CrRort M. , CartTER L. , Swam S.L .
& Dutton RW .
( 1994 ) Generation of polarized antigen-specific CD8 effector populations : reciprocal action of interleukin ( IL ) -4 and IL-12 in promoting type 2 vs. type 1 cytokine profiles .
J Exp Med 180 , 1715. .
TougH D.F .
, Borrow P. & SpreNT J .
( 1996 ) Induction of bystander T cell proliferation by viruses and type I interferon in vivo .
Science 272 , 1947 .
CANTRELL D. ( 1996 ) T cell antigen receptor signal transduction pathways .
Annu Rev Immunol 14 , 259 .
CRABTREE G.R .
& CuipstonE N.A .
( 1994 ) Signal transmission between the plasma membrane and nucleus of T lymphocytes .
Annu Rev Biochem 63 , 1045 .
Rao A .
( 1995 ) NFAT p , a cyclosporin-sensitive transcription factor implicated in cytokine gene induction .
J Leukocyte Bio !
57 , 536 .
BovaBouLa M. , Lrcoux P. , PessEGue B. et al ( 1992 ) Standardization of mRNA titration using a polymerase chain reaction method involving co-amplification with a multispecific internal control .
J Bio/ Chem 267 , 21 830. .
CHirGwin J.M .
, PrzysByta AE .
, MacDbonaLp R.J. & RutrER W.J .
( 1979 ) Isolation of biologically active ribonucleic acid from sources enriched in ribonuclease .
Biochemistry 18 , 5294. .
Guisin V. , CrKvenJakov R. & Byus C. ( 1974 ) Ribonucleic acid isolated by cesium chloride centrifugation .
Biochemistry 13 , 2633 .
Taniguce T. , Matsu H. , FuKita T. et al .
( 1983 ) Structure and expression of a cloned cDNA for human interleukin-2 .
Nature 302 , 305 .
SarenEva T. , PIRHONEN J. , CANTELL K. , KALKKINEN N. & Jurkunen I .
( 1994 ) Effect of N-linked glycosylation in the synthesis , dimerization and secretion of recombinant human IFN-y .
Biochem J 303 , 841 .
Ho S.N .
, THomas D.J .
, TIMMERMAN L.A. , L1 X. , Francke U .
& CrRABTREE G.R .
( 1995 ) NFATc3 , a lymphoid-specific NFATce family member that is calcium-regulated and exhibits distinct DNA binding specificity .
J Bio/ Chem 270 , 19898 .
©1998 Blackwell Science Ltd , Immunology , 93 , 350-357 19 20 .
21 .
22 .
23 .
24 .
25 .
26 .
27 .
28 .
29 .
30. in T lymphocytes 357 Ponts P. , No S.-Y .
, Enoet J. , Gunning P. & Kepes L. ( 1984 ) Evolutionary conservation in the untranslated regions of actin mRNAs : DNA sequence of a human beta-actin cDNA .
Nucleic Acids Res 12 , 1687 .
Ronnt T. , SarenEva T. , Pirmonen J .
& JurkuNnen L ( 1995 ) Activation of IFN-4 , IFN-y , MxA , and IFN regulatory factor 1 genes in influenza A virus-infected human peripheral blood mononuclear cells J Immunol 154 , 2764 .
CLIPSTONE N.A .
& CrRaBTREE G.R .
( 1992 ) Identification of calcineurin as a key signaling enzyme in T-lymphocyte activation .
Nature 357 , 695 .
CaRrTER B.Z .
& MarteR J.S .
( 1991 ) Biology of disease : regulation of mRNA stability and its relevance to disease .
Lab Invest 65 , 610 .
Rooney J.W .
, Sun Y.-A .
, GuimcHER LH .
& Hoey T. ( 1995 ) Novel NFAT sites that mediate activation of the interleukin-2 promoter in response to T-cell receptor stimulation .
Mo/ Cell Biol 15 , 6299 .
Kasarnara T. , Hooks J.J. , Dououerty S.F .
& OppenHEIM J.J. ( 1983 ) Interleukin 2-mediated immune interferon ( IFN-gamma ) production by human T cells and Tcell subsets .
J Immunol 130 , 1784 .
Lvo C. , BurGEON E. , Carew J.A .
et al .
( 1996 ) Recombinant NFAT1 ( NFATp ) is regulated by calcineurin in T cells and mediates transcription of several cytokine genes .
Mol Cell Bio !
16 , 3955 .
Rooney J. W. , Hoey T. & GumcHER LH .
( 1995 ) Coordinate and cooperative roles for NF-AT and AP-1 in the regulation of the murine IL-4 gene .
Immunity 2 , 473 .
Penix L. , Weaver W.M .
, Pang Y. , Young HA .
& C.B .
( 1993 ) Two essential elements in the human interferon-y promoter confer activation specific expression in T cell .
J Exp Med 178 , 1483 .
AunE TM .
, Penix L. , Rmcon MR. & FravELL R. ( 1997 ) Differential transcription directed by discrete elements in naive and memory ( effector ) CD4 T cells and CD8 T cells .
Mol Cell Bio !
17 , 199 .
NortHROP J.P. , Ho S.N .
, CHEN L. et al .
( 1994 ) NF-AT components define a family of transcription factors targeted in T-cell activation .
Nature 369 , 497 .
ARAMBURU J. , AZZONI L. , Rao A .
& Perussia B .
( 1995 ) Activation and expression of the nuclear factors of T cells , NFATp and NFATc , in human natural killer cells : regulation upon CD16 ligand binding .
J Exp Med 182 , 801 .
