' 9 Analytes = Comprehensive Analysis n MICFOVUG Jim Ba , Bb , C3a , C4a , C4d , CSa , at SCS5b-9 , Factor H , Factor I QUIDEL MULTIPLE < ‘ For Research Use Only unt `` 2 `` # s me Journal of Human T Cell Leukemia Virus-I ( HTLV -L ) ‘ Aﬁ ' : '1mmun010 gy Tax-Mediated Apoptosis in Activated T Cells Requires an Enhanced Intracellular Prooxidant State This information is current as of May 10 , 2019 .
Marek Los , Khashayarsha Khazaie , Klaus Schulze-Osthoff , Patrick A. Baeuerle , Volker Schirrmacher and Katerina Chlichlia J Immunol 1998 ; 161:3050-3055 ; ; http : //www .jimmunol.org/content/161/6/3050 References _ This article cites 37 articles , 16 of which you can access for free at : http : //www .jimmunol.org/content/161/6/3050.full # ref-list-1 Why The JT ?
Submit online .
« Rapid Reviews !
30 days* from submission to initial decision * No Triage !
Every submission reviewed by practicing scientists * Fast Publication !
4 weeks from acceptance to publication *average Subscription _- Information about subscribing to The Journal of Immunology is online at : http : //jimmunol.org/subscription Permissions _ Submit copyright permission requests at : http : //www.aai.org/About/Publications/Jl/copyright.html Email Alerts _ Receive free email-alerts when new articles cite this article .
Sign up at : http : //jimmunol.org/alerts The Journal of Immunology is published twice each month by The American Association of Immunologists , Inc. , 1451 Rockville Pike , Suite 650 , Rockville , MD 20852 Copyright © 1998 by The American Association of Immunologists All rights reserved .
Print ISSN : 0022-1767 Online ISSN : 1550-6606 .
6107 '01 4epy uo 1san8 4q jountwrut { 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor ; Human T Cell Leukemia Virus-I ( HTLV-I ) Tax-Mediated Apoptosis in Activated T Cells Requires an Enhanced Intracellular Prooxidant State ' Marek Los , * Khashayarsha Khazaie , ' Klaus Schulze-Osthoff , * Patrick A. Baeuerle , * Volker Schirrmacher , `` and Katerina Chlichlia® ' We have shown that an estradiol-dependent activation of human T cell leukemia virus-I Tax leads to the inhibition of cell proliferation and to the induction of apoptosis .
The present study demonstrates that a hormone-dependent activation of Tax promotes an enhanced prooxidant state in stably transfected Jurkat cells as measured by changes in the intracellular levels of glutathione and H,0 ; , ; these changes are followed by apoptotic cell death .
Additional stimulation of the CD3/TCR pathway enhances the oxidative and apoptotic effects .
Both Tax-mediated apoptosis and oxidative stress can be potently suppressed by antioxidants , as is seen with the administration of recombinant thioredoxin ( adult T cell leukemia-derived factor ) or pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate .
Hormone-induced Tax activation induces a long-lasting activation of NF-B , which is a major target of reactive oxygen intermediates .
The long-term exposure of Jurkat cells to hormone eventually results in a selection of cell clones that have lost Tax activity .
A subsequent transfection of these apparently `` nonresponsive `` clones allows the recovery of Tax responses in these cells .
Our observations indicate that changes in the intracellular redox status may be a determining factor in Tax-mediated DNA damage , apoptosis , and selection against the long-term expression of Tax function .
The Journal of Immunology , 1998 , 161 : 3050-3055. uman T cell leukemia virus ( HTLV ) is the only human retrovirus to be causatively associated with human neo- plasia .
A long-term persistence of HTLV-I leads to the malignant transformation of cells that results in adult T cell leukemia ( 1-3 ) .
Extensive in vitro passaging of infected human T lymphocytes eventually leads to the appearance of immortalized cells with an activated phenotype .
These T cells constitutively express the IL-2Ra subunit , several lymphokines such as IL-4 and IL-6 , and a potent radical-scavenging and reducing agent known as adult T cell leukemia-derived factor/human thioredoxin ( ADF ) ( reviewed in Ref .
4 ) .
HTLV-I carries its own potential oncogene , Tax , which has no cellular counterpart ( 5 , 6 ) and has been implicated in the transforming properties of the virus ( reviewed in Ref .
7 ) .
Tax protein has been shown to promote the transcriptional transactivation of a wide range of growth-associated genes .
In particular , it has been suggested that a Tax-induced expression of the IL-2Ra subunit *Department of Internal Medicine I , Eberhard-Karls University , Tiibingen , Germany : ; *Division of Cellular Immunology , Tumor Immunology Program , German Cancer Research Center , Heidelberg , Germany ; and *Tularik Inc. , San Francisco , CA 94080 Received for publication March 12 , 1998 .
Accepted for publication May 19 , 1998 .
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges .
This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance with 18 U.S.C .
Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact .
* This work was supported in part by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and the Lady Tata Foundation .
2 Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. Katerina Chlichlia , Division of Cellular Immunology , Tumor Immunology Program , German Cancer Research Center , Im Neuenheimer Feld 280 , D-69120 Heidelberg , Germany .
E-mail address : k.chlichlia @ dkfz-heidelberg.de 3 Abbreviations used in this paper : HTLV , human T cell leukemia virus ; ER , estrogen receptor ; GSH , glutathione ; ADF , adult T cell leukemia-derived factor/human thiore-doxin ; CAT , chloramphenicol acetyltransferase ; PDTC , pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate ; EMSA , electrophoretic mobility shift assay ; PI , propidium iodide ; MCB , monochlo-robimane ; ROL , reactive oxygen intermediate ; DCFH , 2',7'-dichlorofluorescein diac-ctate ; CD95L , CD95 ligand ; LTR , long terminal repeat .
Copyright © 1998 by The American Association of Immunologists promotes autocrine stimulation and consequently the transformation of HTLV-L-infected T cells ( 8-11 ) .
Thus far , however , only a single report has described the immortalization of human T cells through the expression of Tax alone .
In this study , the immortalized T cells were particularly sensitive to activation via the CD3/ TCR complex ; this complex promoted their mitosis under conditions in which IL-2R function was presumably blocked ( 12 ) .
A previous study using Jurkat T cells expressing a conditional version of Tax , which was generated by the fusion of the Tax protein of HTLV-I and the hormone-binding domain of the human estrogen receptor ( ER-Tax ) , documented an inhibition of proliferation and an induction of apoptotic cell death upon the hormone-dependent activation of Tax ( 13 ) .
Moreover , we were able to demonstrate that caspases mediate Tax-induced apoptotic T cell death and that the CD95-signaling pathway plays a critical role in this Tax-triggered apoptotic process in our recent work using this hormone-inducible system ( 14 ) .
The antiproliferative effects were dependent upon the duration of ER-Tax activity and were significantly enhanced when the CD3/TCR complex was simultaneously activated ( 13 ) .
These observations corroborated the report of apoptotic cell death in Tax-transformed Rat-1 fibroblasts after serum starvation ( 15 ) .
Furthermore , the cooperative action of Tax and CD3 in T cells supports the reported overlap of the mode of action of Tax with the CD28 T cell costimulatory pathway ( 16 ) .
The transcriptional complex that is activated by CD28 is closely related to NF-KB .
Both play crucial roles in the TCR-independent , cyclosporin A-insensitive pathways of T cell activation .
Both are known to respond to reactive oxygen intermediates ( ROIs ) and to be selectively suppressed by antioxidants ( 17 , 18 ) .
Interestingly , the potent activation of NF- « B by HTLV-I Tax is , at least in transient transfection assays , also blocked by antioxidants ( 19 ) .
Thus , it seems likely that Tax may induce prooxidant conditions .
Such redox changes are expected to function in a cooperative manner , with redox changes induced through Ag or mAb stimulation of the 0022-1767/98/ $ 02.00 6107 '01 4epy uo 1san8 4q jountwrut { 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor ; The Journal of Immunology CD3/TCR complex and leading to apoptosis in ER-Tax-expressing Jurkat T cells .
To test the above possibilities , we have generated ER-Tax-expressing Jurkat T cells .
A hormone-dependent activation of Tax leads to the frans-activation of Tax-responsive promoters in an inducible manner .
We report that a hormone-dependent posttranslational induction of ER-Tax leads to rapid changes in the intracellular levels of H , O , and glutathione ( GSH ) , promoting an intracellular prooxidant state .
Concomitant activation of the CD3/ TCR pathway exaggerates the oxidative stress and causes DNA fragmentation in live cells .
Antioxidants block the Tax-mediated DNA damage .
A long-term exposure of the cells to active ER-Tax selects for or renders surviving cells unresponsive to Tax and allows an apparent recovery of the intracellular redox status .
These observations indicate that changes in the intracellular redox state may be a determining factor in Tax-mediated DNA damage , apoptosis , and unresponsiveness .
Materials and Methods Cell lines and transfections Jurkat T cells that had been stably transfected to express ER-Tax or ER-ATax fusion constructs were maintained in culture as described previously ( 13 ) .
The ER-Tax construct carried the ligand-binding domain of the human ER at the 5 ' end of Tax ; the ER-ATax construct encoded an inactive fusion protein that was missing the first 12 aa of Tax .
Transient transfections and chloramphenicol acetyltransferase ( CAT ) assays were performed by the DEAE-dextran method as described previously ( 13 ) using 3 pug of the CAT reporter plasmids p ( HTLV-DLTR-CAT or p ( NF- « B ) , -CAT and 1 ug of transactivator ( ER-Tax-expressing plasmid ) ( 13 ) .
For the induction of Tax activity , cells were treated with 1 wM of the hormone 17B-estradiol ( Sigma , Deisenhofen , Germany ) .
For the stimulation of NF-KB activity ( positive control ) , cells were incubated with 20 ng/ml of PMA ( Sigma ) and 1 ug/ml of PHA ( Sigma ) for 1 h. Recombinant ADF was produced in Escherichia coli and purified as described previously ( 20 ) .
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay ( EMSA ) Total cell extracts were prepared using a high-salt detergent buffer ( Totex ) as described previously ( 21 ) .
In brief , the cells were harvested by centrif-ugation ; washed once in ice-cold PBS ; and resuspended in 4 cell volumes of Totex buffer containing 20 mM HEPES ( pH 7.9 ) , 350 mM NaCl , 20 % ( w/v ) glycerol , 1 % ( w/v ) of Nonidet P-40 , 1 mM MgCl , , 0.5 mM EDTA , 0.1 mM EGTA , 0.5 mM DTT , 0.1 % PMSF , and 1 % aprotinin .
The cell lysate was incubated on ice for 20 min and then centrifuged for 5 min at 13,000 X g at 4°C .
The protein content of the supernatant was determined , and equal amounts of protein ( 10-15 ug ) were added to the binding reaction mixture containing 20 ug of BSA ( Sigma ) , 2 ug of poly ( dI-dC ) ( Boehringer , Mannheim , Germany ) , 2 ul of a buffer ( 20 mM HEPES ( pH 7.9 ) , 20 % glycerol , 100 mM KCI , 0.5 mM EDTA , 1 % of Nonidet P-40 , 2 mM DTT , and 0.1 % PMSF ) , 4 ul of a buffer ( 20 % Ficoll 400 , 100 mM HEPES , 300 mM KCI , 10 mM DTT , and 0.1 % PMSF ) , and 10,000 cpm ( Cerenkov ) of a *°P-labeled NF-KB oligonucleotide in a final volume of 20 ul .
An NF- « B oligonucleotide with a high-affinity NF-B-binding motif ( Promega , Heidelberg , Germany ) was labeled with [ y-*P ] JATP ( 3000 Ci/ mmol ; Amersham , Braunschweig , Germany ) and T4 polynucleotide kinase ( Promega ) .
The reaction mixture was incubated at room temperature for 25 min .
Native 4 % polyacrylamide gels were run in 45 mM Tris-borate , 1 mM EDTA .
NF- « B-binding activity was determined by the beta-imaging of native gels .
Apoptosis assay The induction of apoptosis was measured using a modified version of a method that has been described previously ( 22 ) .
Briefly , cells were loaded with 1 pg/ml of Hoechst 33342 ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) for 5 min at room temperature and then transferred on ice while protected from light before measurement .
After transferring the cells to flow cytometer-com-patible tubes , propidium iodide ( PT ) was added to a final concentration of 0.5 ug/ml .
FACS Vantage ( Becton Dickinson , Heidelberg , Germany ) was used for sample acquisition and data analysis .
Hoechst 33342 was excited at 360 nm , and emission was measured at 450 nm .
PI was excited at 488 nm , and emission was detected at 610 nm .
The cell population that was bright for Hoechst 33342 staining but still negative for PI was considered to be undergoing apoptosis .
3051 Intracellular GSH measurement The measurement of intracellular GSH was performed according to Rice et al .
( 23 ) with modifications .
Cells that had been kept in culture medium were loaded with 20 uM of monochlorobimane ( MCB ) ( Molecular Probes ) for 10 min at 37°C .
The reaction was stopped by the addition of ice- cold PBS .
Cells were subsequently harvested , washed through cold FCS followed by two additional washes with cold PBS , and analyzed with a FACS Vantage flow cytometer .
The 351- to 364-nm bandpass filter was used for excitation , and emission was detected at 450 nm .
Dead cells were excluded by forward/side scatter gating .
The mean values of the fluorescence signal from duplicate samples were considered for data analysis .
Fluorescent measurement of intracellular peroxides with 2',7 dichlorofluorescein diacetate ( DCFH ) Intracellular peroxides were measured according to Royall et al .
( 24 ) .
A stock solution of DCFH ( 10 mM ; Molecular Probes ) was prepared under nitrogen in DMSO and stored at -20°C .
Cells were loaded with 5 uM of DCFH in culture medium at 37°C for 45 min and then placed on ice before measurement .
Loaded cells were collected into FACS-compatible tubes , supplemented with PI ( 1 ug/ml ! )
( Sigma ) , and measured using a FACScan ( Becton Dickinson } .
Results Stably transfected ER-Tax Jurkat cells exhibit hormone-inducible Tax activity ER-Tax fusion proteins were shown to transactivate several Tax-responsive reporter plasmids in a hormone-dependent manner ( 13 ) .
Here , we generated Jurkat T cells stably expressing inducible Tax ( ER-Tax ) or an inactive form of Tax ( ER-ATax ) .
The transactivation potential of the stably transfected , ER-Tax-expressing Jurkat cells was determined in a time-course experiment using ( HTLV-I ) long terminal repeat ( LTR ) - and NF- « B-dependent reporter plasmids .
Cells were preincubated for different lengths of time in medium with or without estradiol and then transfected with the Tax-responsive reporter plasmids .
The transiently transfected cells were cultivated for another 2 days in the presence or absence of estradiol before CAT reporter gene assays were performed .
A hormone-dependent transactivation of the ( HTLV-DLTR- and NF- « B-controlled promoters was observed in the cells that were cultured for 2 days with estradiol immediately following the transfections ( Fig .
1 , day 0 ) .
Comparable increases in CAT activity were detected with cells that had been preincubated with estradiol for 3 days ( data not shown ) and 7 days before transfection ( Fig .
1 , day -7 ) .
Thus , stably transfected ER-Tax Jurkat cells exhibit estradiol-dependent Tax-activity .
Long-term exposure to estradiol leads to Tax unresponsiveness To test the long-term effects of constitutive Tax-activity , cells were preincubated for 30 days with or without estradiol before being transfected with the Tax-responsive plasmids .
Preincubating the cells for 30 days with hormone led to unresponsiveness to Tax , which reduced the expression of the ( HTLV-D ) LTR- and NF- « B-driven reporter gene plasmids almost to the basal level of unin-duced cells ( Fig .
1 , day -30 ) .
Cells that had lost responsiveness to Tax due to 1 mo of continuous culture in the presence of estradiol responded to a new transient transfection of exogenous ER-Tax .
In these cells , a hormone-dependent transactivation of LTR- and NF- « B-dependent reporter plasmids could be detected ( Fig .
1 , day -30 plus ER-Tax ) .
Exposing control cells expressing an inactive ( truncated ) form of Tax ( ER-ATax ) to estradiol for the same time periods did not result in the transactivation of transiently transfected NF- « B- or LTR-CAT constructs ( data not shown ) .
The DNA-binding activity of NF- « B was examined by EMSA for different timepoints after the activation of ER-Tax .
Treating ER-Tax-expressing Jurkat cells with hormone resulted in a time-dependent , marked increase of the NF- « B-specific DNA-binding 6107 '01 4epy uo 1san8 4q jountwrut { 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor ; 3052 FIGURE 1 .
Determination of Tax activity in the ER-Tax-expressing Jurkat clone after long-term incubation with the hormone .
The ER-Tax cells were preincubated with or without estradiol ( E ) for the time period indicated .
Next , the cells were washed and transfected with the reporter plasmids p ( HTLV-DLTR-CAT ( 3 pug ) ( 4 ) or p ( NF- « B ) , -CAT ( 3 pg ) ( B ) and/or the ER-Tax expression plasmid ( 1 ug ) where indicated .
After transfection , the transfected cells were maintained for 40 to 48 h in the presence or absence of hormone ; a CAT assay was subsequently performed .
The CAT assays were scanned and the CAT signal was 400 ~ 300 200 arbitrary units 1 E 100 o LCA ( HTLV-DLTR-CAT o a Able , Ik TAX PROMOTES OXIDATIVE STRESS B NF- « B-CAT -E 800 - A -E +E C +E T 600 -|-i arbitrary units 1 fro 200 0 +4 quantified using Adobe Photoshop ( Mountain View , CA ) .
The arbitrary start of incubation day 0 with E day -7 day -30 start of incubation with E day -30 day 0 day -7 | day -30 | day-30 units ( X 10 `` ) represent the intensity of the spots as measured by the Scan-analysis program .
The experiments day 0 transfection with : LTR-CAT day 0 transfection with : LTR-CAT +ER-Tax INF-xB-CAT NFxB-CAT TPR Tak were performed in triplicate .
The bars represent SDs .
activity for =5 days ( Fig .
2 ) .
After estradiol treatment of the cells for 5 days , a 50-fold increase of the NF- « B-specific band compared with control cells was observed .
Thus , in contrast to most other activators of NF- « B , Tax-induced NF-KB activation is long-lasting and is stable for > 5 days .
In agreement with the CAT ER-ATax ER-Tax Jurkat cells Jurkat Fold | _ | no [ soe |11 | 30 | ao | 1s |inoe| so | 1s | 1s | 22 induction i `` R a < |= |s|s | s 3 | f Pl : |f + I ” .
woe F FIGURE 2 .
Kinetics of the hormone-inducible Tax-dependent induction of the DNA-binding activity of NF-KB .
The ER-Tax- or ER-ATax-expressing Jurkat cells were cultured in the presence of estradiol ( E ) for the time period indicated ( d = days ) .
Cells that had been stimulated with PMA ( 20 ng/ml ) and PHA ( 1 ug/ml ! )
for 1 h were used as positive controls .
Total cell extracts were prepared for each timepoint , and equal amounts of protein were subjected to EMSA using an NF- « B-specific oligonucleotide .
The position of the specific DNA/protein complex is indicated by an arrow .
The bands were scanned with a PhosphorImager ( Molecular Dynamics , Sunnyvale , CA ) , and the intensity was analyzed with ImageQuant software ( Molecular Dynamics ) .
Fold induction is indicated in each case as compared with control cells that had been incubated in the absence of hormone and adjusted to the lower unspecific band .
assays , NF- « B activation was no longer detected after a prolonged exposure ( 1 mo ) of the cells to hormone ( Fig .
2 ) .
Control ER-ATax-expressing cells were not able to induce NF- « B-binding activity at the various timepoints tested ( Fig .
2 and data not shown ) .
Tax induces apoptosis that is blocked by antioxidants We subsequently analyzed the viability of the Jurkat cells that had been exposed to Tax activity or treated with moderate concentrations ( 1 ug/ml ! )
of anti-CD3 mAb .
As shown in Figure 3 , treating ER-Tax-expressing Jurkat cells with anti-CD3 mAb alone or for 30 h with estradiol alone resulted in little or no changes in apoptosis ( DNA fragmentation ) as measured by Hoechst 33342 stain-ing .
However , the combination of these two stimuli was strongly synergistic , leading to a nearly threefold increase in the total number of cells undergoing apoptosis compared with the background level of spontaneous apoptosis in these cells .
While the induction 40 [ ] medium T M anti-CD3 ie 30 wn b.. m o - `` 20 « w control ADF E E + ADF - PDTC - PDTC+E FIGURE 3 .
Blocking of Tax and/or anti-CD3-induced apoptosis by an-tioxidants .
Cells expressing ER-Tax were cultured for 30 h with ADF ( 40 ug/tol ) alone , estradiol ( E ) ( 1 M ) and ADF , PDTC ( 5 mM ) alone , or PDTC and E as indicated .
ADF and PDTC were added 15 min before the addition of hormone .
Anti-CD3 mAb stimulation ( immobilized at a concentration of 1 pg/ml ) was absent ( empty bars ) or present ( filled bars ) for the same time period .
After 30 h , cells were stained with Hoechst 33342 and PI and analyzed by FACS analysis .
Cells that were highly stained with Hoechst 33342 but still negative for PI were considered to be undergoing apoptosis .
6107 '01 4epy uo 1san8 4q jountwrut { 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor ; The Journal of Immunology % relative intracellular GSH T 120 Time ( h ) FIGURE 4 .
- Time-dependent effect of Tax activity on intracellular GSH levels .
The kinetics of intracellular GSH content are shown .
Inducible ER-Tax fusion protein ( C ) was activated by the addition of 1 M of estradiol .
Untransfected control cells ( & ) and ER-ATax-expressing cells ( 0 ) were similarly treated .
Cells were harvested and analyzed for intracellular GSH content at the indicated time intervals .
Next , cells were loaded with MCB and subjected to FACS analysis .
The mean values obtained from four independent experiments are shown together with the variation from the mean .
The fluorescence intensity of the unstimulated cells is given as 100 % .
of apoptosis by a combination of anti-CD3 and hormone was already detectable in ER-Tax Jurkat cells at 8 h after treatment , no significant changes in the number of apoptotic cells were observed for =30 h posttreatment in control ER-ATax cells ( data not shown ) .
Thus , the apoptosis observed in TCR-stimulated cells could clearly be attributed to Tax activity .
To investigate the role of the intracellular redox state in Tax-mediated apoptosis , cells were pretreated with antioxidants before hormone and anti-CD3 .
Thioredoxin ( ADF ) , which is a potent 3053 physiologic antioxidative protein that is able to be secreted and taken up by various cells ( 20 , 25 , 26 ) , strongly inhibited Tax-induced apoptosis ( Fig .
3 ) .
Pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate ( PDTC ) , which is an iron chelator and radical scavenger , was slightly less effective .
In ADF-treated cells , viability was even moderately increased compared with control cells .
Thus , antioxidants can block Tax-induced apoptotic cell death .
Tax induces a prooxidant state in T cells Since antioxidants can prevent Tax-induced apoptosis , we examined whether Tax has an effect on the cellular redox state .
Jurkat cells stably expressing a hormone-inducible Tax fusion protein ( ER-Tax ) were treated for various times with estradiol .
Untransfected cells or cells expressing ER-ATax were used as controls .
The activation of the ER-Tax fusion protein resulted in an immediate ( 15 min postinduction ) drop in the intracellular amount of GSH and in considerably reduced levels within 2 h after Tax activation ( Fig .
4 ) .
A slow recovery of the GSH levels approaching the levels seen for control cells was seen at 5 days after the beginning of estradiol treatment .
In contrast , untransfected or control ER-ATax Jurkat cells that had been treated with estradiol did not show any decrease in intracellular GSH levels ( Fig .
4 ) .
ER-Tax Jurkat cells that were cultured in the presence of hormone for a prolonged period of time ( 1 mo ) showed normal levels of GSH ( data not shown ) .
To confirm the above observations , intracellular H , O , levels were measured at 2 h after ER-Tax or ER-ATax Jurkat cells had been treated with hormone .
The treatment of ER-Tax Jurkat cells with estradiol led to a marked increase in the intracellular levels of H , O , and a concomitant decrease of GSH ( Fig .
5 , A and D ) .
The Tax-mediated prooxidant state was inhibited by pretreating the cells with ADF or PDTC ( Fig .
5 , A and D ) .
Thus , the Tax-induced ( A | ER-Tax 200 FIGURE 5 .
Effect of Tax and/or CD3/TCR stimulation on intracellular H , O , and GSH levels .
The induction of prooxidant changes after the activation of Tax and/or TCR is shown .
Jurkat cells expressing ER-Tax or ER-ATax were activated for 2 h with 1 gM of estradiol ( E ) .
A , At 15 min before stimulation with the hormone , human recombinant ADF ( 40 ug/ml ! )
or PDTC ( 5 mM ) was added to the cultures as indicated .
B and C , Cells 50 % relative intracellular H307 § ER-ATax |B | ER-Tax A 200 200 150 150 & 50 were stimulated with coated anti-CD3 0 7 mAb ( 1 ug/ml ! )
for 2 h and incubated control | E __ app control _ E _ anti-CD3 amEEm sunlint OE lops nulls- ( tn !
simultaneously with or without hor-D | ER-Tax mone as indicated .
Cells were loaded with DCFH for 45 min , and H , O , was measured by FACS .
D , At 15 min before stimulation with estradiol , ADF ( 40 ug/ml ) or PDTC ( 5 uM ) was added to the cultures as indicated .
Cells were then loaded with MCB , and the GSH level was measured by FACS analysis .
The mean values collected from four independent experiments are shown with the variation from the mean .
The mean fluorescence intensity of the control 0 was considered to be 100 % .
% relative intracellular GSH & j E+ control E ADF 6107 '01 4epy uo 1san8 4q jountwrut { 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor ; 3054 prooxidant state as well as apoptosis can be blocked by antioxi-dants .
These observations indicate that enhanced prooxidant conditions play a crucial role in the induction of T cell apoptosis by HTLV-I Tax .
Tax and CD3/TCR-mediated signals synergize in inducing a prooxidant state The CD3/TCR complex and Tax reportedly cooperate in inducing activation-associated events in T cells as well as activation-induced apoptosis ( 11-13 ) .
Thus , the individual and combined effects of these two independent stimuli on the intracellular redox state of Jurkat T cells were examined .
In response to treatment with immobilized anti-CD3 mAb alone , both ER-Tax- or control ER-ATax-expressing cells exhibited a comparable increase in the intracellular concentration of H , O , ( Fig .
5 , B and C ) .
As expected , estradiol alone enhanced the intracellular H , O , in the ER-Tax cells , while no such increase was seen in the ER-ATax Jurkat cells .
Treatment with anti-CD3 mAb and estradiol led to an additive enhancement of intracellular H , O , in ER-Tax Jurkat cells , but no enhancement was observed in the control ER-ATax Jurkat cells ( Fig .
5 , B and C ) .
While only transient changes ( lasting for a few hours ) were observed in the intracellular levels of H , O , when anti-CD3 mAb was used , the changes that were induced by hormone activation of ER-Tax were sustained and lasted for several days ( data not shown ) .
This observation highlights the chronic nature of the activation events that are mediated by Tax in contrast to the transient effects that are seen in response to TCR stimulation .
Discussion Our experiments indicate that Jurkat T cells stably expressing ER-Tax exhibit hormone-inducible Tax activity upon a short-term exposure to estradiol .
A long-term exposure to hormone ( > 30 days ) leads to an apparent unresponsiveness .
The unresponsiveness is not due to changes in the inherent properties of the cells , as a new transfection with ER-Tax was able to reestablish hormone-depen-dence .
One likely explanation is that cells that are defective in Tax activity have a growth advantage and are selected upon the continuous exposure of cultures to hormone .
The early and late effects of Tax activation in the Tax-expressing Jurkat cells can be quite different .
It has been reported previously that NF-KB activity could not be detected in the nucleus following a long-term expression of Tax in Jurkat T lymphocytes ( 27 ) .
In this case , the ability of mi-togens and cytokines to induce NF- « B activation was also blocked .
It seems that the NF- « B-signaling pathway was impaired in the latter study , since Tax was active and the induction of other transcription factors , such as Fos and Jun , was unaffected .
However , our results suggest a selection against Tax activity following the prolonged activation of this protein rather than a suppression of NF- « B activation .
Taken together , these observations indicate that T cells may not be able to tolerate the intracellular constitutive expression of Tax for prolonged time periods .
This intolerance may explain the apparent shut down of Tax expression in HTLV-T-infected leukemic T cells .
Our posttranslational inducible system allowed a careful kinetic analysis both of the Tax-mediated effects and of NF- « B activation .
We have shown previously that one of the early effects of Tax function is activation-induced T cell apoptosis ( 13 ) .
The observations that we report here indicate that HTLV-I Tax mediates oxidative stress , which in turn may subsequently activate NF-KB , a prooxidant-inducible transcription factor .
The activation of NF- « B has been recently linked to apoptosis .
NF- « B plays either an an-tiapoptotic or a proapoptotic role , and the role that is chosen may TAX PROMOTES OXIDATIVE STRESS depend upon the cell type , subunit composition , or duration of the NF- « B response ( reviewed in Ref .
28 ) .
In our study , apoptotic cell death in Jurkat cells that had been induced by Tax was shown to be accompanied by NF-B activation .
The duration of Tax stimulation determines the intensity of T cell activation and oxidative stress and the severity of the antiproliferative effect .
This finding may be related in part to the persistence of a prooxidative state and to a prolonged activation of NF- « B .
Transactivation and DNA-binding studies revealed that Tax activity induces a long-lasting induction of NF- « B , rather than a transient one as has been shown for several chemical and physiologic stimuli of NFE- « B ( 27 , 29 ) .
The strong NF- « B activation was entirely due to the induced Tax protein and not to a direct response of the cells to hormone , as control ER-ATax-expressing cells did not show any NF- « B activation after being exposed to estradiol .
Therefore , as previously proposed for apoptosis triggered by serum withdrawal ( 30 ) , the unusually persistent Tax-induced activation of NF- « B may exert a proapoptotic function in our experimental system .
A short-term hormone induction of ER-Tax in Jurkat cells together with the stimulation of TCR promotes apoptotic cell death ( 13 ) .
The apoptosis-promoting effect of Tax is particularly evident when low concentrations of anti-CD3 are used .
Tax is also able to induce apoptosis in Rat-1 fibroblasts , and this apoptosis is blocked by the Bcl-2 protein ( 15 ) .
Interestingly , Bcel-2 has been shown to function in an antioxidant pathway to prevent apoptosis ( 31 ) .
Moreover , intracellular prooxidant conditions reportedly induce apoptosis in several instances ( reviewed in Ref .
32 ) .
In the present study , we provide evidence that the mediator of apoptosis , Tax , can induce prooxidant conditions in the cell .
This is revealed by a decrease in the intracellular GSH level that occurs rapidly ( within 15 min ) and lasts for several days .
The decrease in the intracellular GSH level is accompanied by a Tax-mediated increase of intracellular H , O , levels .
The long-lasting , Tax-induced prooxidant state correlated with the observed apoptosis and NF-KB activation .
Tax-induced NF- « B activation can be blocked by antioxidants ( 19 ) .
In addition , Tax-induced apoptosis can be prevented by radical scavengers .
The fact that Tax activity induces a prooxidant state in the cell shows that Tax uses common pathways to induce cellular activation and apoptosis .
Since ROIs are involved in the induction of CD95 ligand ( CD95L ) mRNA expression in some cases ( 33 , 34 ) , this involvement could explain the mechanism underlying the Tax-induced up-regulation of CD95L ( 14 ) .
Moreover , it has been recently shown that prooxidant-induced NF-KB activation may be involved in the transcriptional activation of the CD95L gene ( 34 , 35 ) .
Tax can transactivate the antioxidative stress protein ADF/thi-oredoxin ( 36 ) .
ADF is a stress-inducible protein that is secreted from cells ; this protein plays an essential role in cellular protection against oxidative stress and cell death and is itself induced by various oxidative agents ( 37 ) .
The present work provides direct evidence for the production of ROIs by Tax and the involvement of these intermediates in Tax-induced apoptotic T cell death .
Our findings suggest that changes in the intracellular redox status may be a critical factor in Tax-mediated DNA damage and apoptosis and in the apparent shut down of Tax expression in HTLV-I-infected cells .
Acknowledgments We thank Profs .
Junji Yodoi and Takashi Uchiyama and Drs .
Niki Kara-gianni and Meinrad Busslinger for their advice , interest , and encouragement .
6107 '01 4epy uo 1san8 4q jountwrut { 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor ; The Journal of Immunology References 1 .
10 .
11 .
12 .
13 .
14 .
15 .
16 .
17 .
18 .
19 .
Hinuma , Y. , K. Nagata , M. Hanaoka , M. Nakai , T. Matsumoto , K. I. Kinoshita , S. Shirakawa , and I. Miyoshi .
1981 .
Adult T-cell leukemia : antigen in an ATL cell line and detection of antibodies to the antigen in human sera .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 78:6476. .
Poiesz , B. J. , F. W. Ruscetti , A. F. Gazdar , P. A. Bunn , J. D. Minna , and R. C. Gallo .
1980 .
Detection and isolation of type C retrovirus particles from fresh and cultured lymphocytes of a patient with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 77:7415. .
Uchiyama , T. , J. Yodoi , K. Sagawa , K. Takatsuki , and H. Uchino .
1977 .
Adult T-cell leukemia : clinical and hematologic features of 16 cases .
Blood 50:481. .
Yodoi , J. , and T. Uchiyama .
1992 .
Diseases associated with HTLV-I : virus , IL-2 receptor dysregulation , and redox regulation .
Immunol .
Today 13:405. .
Seiki , M. , S. Hattori , Y. Hirayama , and M. Yoshida .
1983 .
Human adult T-cell leukemia virus : complete nucleotide sequence of the provirus genome integrated in leukemia cell DNA .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 80:3618. .
Yoshida , M. , J. Fujisawa , J. Inoue , and M. Seiki .
1986 .
Mechanism of the gene expression of HTLV-I and its association with ATL .
AIDS Res .
1:871. .
Ressler , S. , L. M. Connor , and S. J. Marriott .
1996 .
Cellular transformation by human T-cell leukemia virus type I. FEMS Microbiol .
Lett .
140:99. .
Inoue , J. , M. Seiki , T. Taniguchi , S. Tsuru , and M. Yoshida .
1986 .
Induction of interleukin 2 receptor gene expression by p40x encoded by human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 .
EMBO J .
5:2883. .
Yodoi , J. , and T. Uchiyama .
1986 .
IL-2 receptor dysfunction and adult T-cell leukemia .
Immunol .
Rev .
92:135 .
Cross , S. L. , M. B. Feinberg , J .
B. Wolf , N. J. Holbrook , F. Wong-Staal , and W. J. Leonard .
1987 .
Regulation of the human interleukin-2 receptor -chain promoter : activation of a nonfunctional promoter by the transactivator gene of HTLV-I .
Cell 49:47 .
Maruyama , M. , H. Shibuya , H. Harada , M. Hatakeyama , M. Seiki , T. Fujita , J. Inoue , M. Yoshida , and T. Taniguchi .
1987 .
Evidence for aberrant activation of the interleukin-2 autocrine loop by HTLV-1-encoded p40x and T3/Ti complex triggering .
Cell 48:343 .
Akagi , T. , and K. Shimotohno .
1993 .
Proliferative response of Tax1-transduced primary human T-cells to anti-CD3 antibody stimulation by an interleukin-2-independent pathway .
J. Virol .
67:1211 .
Chlichlia , K. , G. Moldenhauer , P. T. Daniel , M. Busslinger , L. Gazzolo , V. Schirrmacher , and K. Khazaie .
1995 .
Immediate effects of reversible HTLV-1 tax function : T-cell activation and apoptosis .
Oncogene 10:269 .
Chlichlia , K. , M. Busslinger , M. E. Peter , H. Walczak , P. H. Krammer , V. Schirmacher , and K. Khazaic .
1997 .
ICB-proteases mediated HTLV-I Tax-induced apoptotic T-cell death .
Oncogene 14:2265 .
Yamada , T. , S. Yamaoka , T. Goto , M. Nakai , Y. Tsujimoto , and M. Hatanaka .
1994 .
The human T-cell leukemia virus type I Tax protein induces apoptosis which is blocked by the bel-2 protein .
J. Virol .
68:3374 .
McGuire , K. L. , V. E. Curtiss , E. L. Larson , and W. A. Haseltine .
1993 .
Influence of human T-cell leukemia virus type I tax and rex on interleukin-2 gene expression .
J. Virol .
67:1590 .
Los , M. , H. Schenk , K. Hexel , P. A. Bacuerle , W. Drige , and K. Schulze-Osthoff .
1995 .
IL-2 gene expression and NF-KB activation through CD28 requires reactive oxygen production by 5-lipoxygenase .
EMBO J .
14:3731 .
Schreck , R. , P. Ricber , and P. A. Bacuerle .
1991 .
Reactive oxygen intermediates as apparently widely used messengers in the activation of the NF-KB transcription factor and HIV-1 .
EMBO J .
10:2247 .
Schreck , R. , R. Grassmann , B. Fleckenstein , and P. A. Bacuerle .
1992 .
Antioxidants selectively suppress activation of NF-B by human T-cell leukemia virus type I Tax protein .
J. Virol .
66:6288 .
20 .
21 .
22 .
23 .
24 .
25 .
26 .
27 .
28 .
29 .
30 .
31 .
32 .
33 .
34 .
35 .
36 .
37 .
3055 Schenk , H. , M. Klein , W. Erdbriigger , W. Drége , and K. Schulze-Osthoff .
1994 .
Distinct effects of thioredoxin and antioxidants on the activation of transcription factors NF- « B and AP-1 .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 91:1672 .
Bacuerle , P. A. , and D. Baltimore .
1988 .
IKB : a specific inhibitor of the NF-KB transcription factor .
Science 242:540 .
Hardin , J .
A. , D. H. Sherr , M. DeMaria , and P. A. Lopez .
1992 .
A simple fluorescence method for surface antigen phenotyping of lymphocytes undergoing DNA fragmentation .
J. Immunol .
Methods 154:99 .
Rice , G. C. , E. A. Bump , D. C. Shrieve , W. Lee , and M. Kovacs .
1986 .
Quantitative analysis of cellular glutathione by flow cytometry utilizing monochloro-bimane : some applications to radiation and drug resistance in vitro and in vivo .
Cancer Res .
46:6105 .
Royall , J .
A. , and H. Ischiropoulos .
1993 .
Evaluation of 2',7'-dichlorofluorescein and dibydrorhodamine 123 as fluorescent probes for intracellular H , O , in cultured endothelial cells .
Arch .
Biochem .
Biophys .
302:348 .
Tagaya , Y. , Y. Macda , A. Mitsui , N. Kondo , H. Matsui , J. Hamuro , J .
Brown , K. I. Arai , T. Yokota , H. Wakasugi , and J. Yodoi .
1989 .
ATL-derived factor ( ADF ) , an IL-2 receptor/Tac inducer homologous to thioredoxin : possible involvement of dithiol-reduction in the IL-2 receptor induction .
EMBO J .
8:757 .
Wakasugi , N. , Y. Tagaya , H. Wakasugi , A. Mitsui , M. Maeda , J. Yodoi , and T. Tursz .
1990 .
Adult T-cell leukemia-derived factor/thioredoxin , produced by both human T-lymphotropic virus type-I- and Epstein-Barr virus-transformed lymphocytes , acts as an autocrine growth factor and synergizes with interleukin 1 and interleukin 2 .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 87:8282 .
Ruben , S. M. , and C. A. Rosen .
1990 .
Suppression of signals required for activation of transcription factor NF-KB in cells constitutively expressing HTLV-I Tax protein .
New Biol .
2:894 .
Baichwal , V. R. , and P. A. Bacuerle .
1997 .
Apoptosis : activate NF-KB or dic ?
Curr .
Biol .
7 : R94 .
Sen , R. , and D. Baltimore .
1986 .
Inducibility of x immunoglobulin enhancer-binding protein NF-KB by a posttranslational mechanism .
Cell 47:921 .
Grimm , S. , M. K. A. Bauer , P. A. Bacuerle , and K. Schulze-Osthoff .
1996 .
Bcl-2 down-regulates the activity of transcription factor NF-KB is induced upon apoptosis .
J .
Cell Biol .
134:13 .
Hockenbery , D. M. , Z N. Oltvai , X. M. Yin , C. L. Milliman , and S. J. Korsmeyer .
1993 .
Bcl-2 functions in an antioxidant pathway to prevent apoptosis .
Cell 75:241 .
Buttke , T. M. , and P. A. Sandstrom .
1994 .
Oxidative stress as a mediator of apoptosis .
Immunol .
Today 15:7 .
Hug , H. , S. Strand , A. Grambihler , J. Galle , V. Hack , W. Stremmel , P. H. Krammer , and P. R. Galle .
1997 .
Reactive oxygen intermediates are involved in the induction of CD95 ligand mRNA expression by cytostatic drugs in hepatoma cells .
J. Biol .
Chem .
272:28191 .
Bauer , M. K. A. , M. Vogt , M. Los , J. Siegel , S. Wesselborg , and K. Schulze-Osthoff .
1997 .
Role of reactive oxygen intermediates in activation-induced CD95 ( APO-1/Fas ) ligand expression .
J. Biol .
Chem .
273:8048 .
Cui , H. , K. Matsui , S. Omura , S. L. Schauer , R. A. Matulka , G. E. Sonenshein , and S.-T. Ju .
1997 .
Proteasome regulation of activation-induced cell death .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 94:7515 .
Masutani , H. , K. Hirota , T. Sasada , Y. Ueda-Taniguchi , Y. Taniguchi , H. Sono , and J. Yodoi .
1996 .
Transactivation of an inducible anti-oxidative stress protein , human thioredoxin , by HTLV-I Tax .
Immunol .
Lett .
54:67 .
Nakamura , H. , K. Nakamura , and J. Yodoi .
1997 .
Redox regulation of cellular activation .
Annu .
Rev .
Immunol .
15:351 .
6107 '01 4epy uo 1san8 4q jountwrut { 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor ;
