`` n vivo , RE SEARCH * Discover More j has Rs teJournal o Cutting Edge : BASH , A Novel Signaling Aﬁlmmunolo gy Molecule Preferentially Expressed in B Cells of the Bursa of Fabricius BULLANTBODIE - CTSA ) Cor C25 'Can 3 ) This inf tion i t Ryo Goitsuka , Yu-ichi Fujimura , Hiroshi Mamada , Akiko of £1 : le ( Elana ; i ) ; Is current as Umeda , Toshifumi Morimura , Koji Uetsuka , Kunio Doi , ' Sachiyo Tsuji and Daisuke Kitamura J Immunol 1998 ; 161:5804-5808 ; ; http : //www .jimmunol.org/content/161/11/5804 References _ This article cites 21 articles , 8 of which you can access for free at : http : //www .jimmunol.org/content/161/1 1/5804 .
full # ref-list- 1 Why The JT ?
Submit online .
« Rapid Reviews !
30 days* from submission to initial decision * No Triage !
Every submission reviewed by practicing scientists * Fast Publication !
4 weeks from acceptance to publication *average Subscription _- Information about subscribing to The Journal of Immunology is online at : http : //jimmunol.org/subscription Permissions _ Submit copyright permission requests at : http : //www.aai.org/About/Publications/Jl/copyright.html Email Alerts _ Receive free email-alerts when new articles cite this article .
Sign up at : http : //jimmunol.org/alerts The Journal of Immunology is published twice each month by The American Association of Immunologists , Inc. , 1451 Rockville Pike , Suite 650 , Rockville , MD 20852 Copyright © 1998 by The American Association of Immunologists All rights reserved .
Print ISSN : 0022-1767 Online ISSN : 1550-6606 .
6107 '01 4epy uo 1san8 4q jountwrut { 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor ; ( CTIDG € =\ a ) Cutting Edge : BASH , A Novel Signaling Molecule Preferentially Expressed in B Cells of the Bursa of Fabricius ' Ryo Goitsuka , `` * `` Yu-ichi Fujimura , T Hiroshi Mamada , `` Akiko Umeda , !
Toshifumi Morimura , `` Koji Uetsuka , * Kunio Doi , `` Sachiyo Tsuji , `` and Daisuke Kitamura The bursa of Fabricius is a gut-associated lymphoid organ that is essential for the generation of a diversified B cell repertoire in the chicken .
We describe here a novel gene preferentially expressed in bursal B cells .
The gene encodes an 85-kDa protein , designated BASH ( B cell adaptor containing SH2 do-main ) , that contains N-terminal acidic domains with SH2 domain-binding phosphotyrosine-based motifs , a proline-rich domain , and a C-terminal SH2 domain .
BASH shows a substantial sequence similarity to SLP-76 , an adaptor protein functioning in TCR-signal transduction .
BASH becomes tyrosine-phosphorylated with the B cell Ag receptor ( BCR ) cross-link or by coexpression with Syk and Lyn and associates with signaling molecules including Syk and a putative chicken She homologue .
Overexpression of BASH results in suppression of the NF-AT activation induced by BCR-cross-linking .
These findings suggest that BASH is involved in BCR-mediated signal transduction and could play a critical role in B cell development in the bursa .
The Journal of Immunology , 1998 , 161 : 5804-5808. he avian bursa of Fabricius is an outgrowth of the cloaca that is essential for the generation of a peripheral B cell pool with diversified Ag receptors ( 1 , 2 ) .
Within the bursa , a small number of committed progenitors extensively proliferate and produce diversified B cell progeny through a somatic Ig gene conversion mechanism .
The majority of these B cells undergo programmed cell death in the bursa and only 1-5 % of the cells survive to emigrate into the periphery ( 3 , 4 ) .
As has been *Inheritance and Variation Group , PREST , JST , Kyoto , Japan ; *Division of Molecular Biology , Research Institute for Biological Sciences , Science University of Tokyo , Chiba , Japan ; and *Department of Veterinary Pathology , University of Tokyo , Tokyo , Japan Received for publication August 6 , 1998 .
Accepted for publication September 25 , 1998 .
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges .
This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance with 18 U.S.C .
Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact .
* This work has been supported by grants from the Japan Science Technology Corporation and the Human Frontier Science Program ( RG-366/96 ) .
2 Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. Ryo Goitsuka , Division of Molecular Biology , Research Institute for Biological Sciences , Science University of Tokyo , 2669 Yamazaki , Noda-city , Chiba 278 , Japan ; E-mail : ryogoi @ rs.noda .
sut.ac.jp Copyright © 1998 by The American Association of Immunologists 7 demonstrated in the mouse ( 5 ) , the B cell Ag receptor ( BCR ) may be required for the survival and maturation of B cells in the bursa , because it has been reported that loss of surface Ig precedes the induction of apoptosis in rapidly dividing bursal B cells ( 6 ) .
This finding suggests that continuous expression of surface BCR or the signals thereof might be required for the survival of bursal B cells .
Consistent with a role in activation and proliferation of bursal B cells , the BCR has been shown to be capable of transducing sig-nals , such as rapid induction of calcium influx and phospholipid hydrolysis upon cross-linking ( 7 ) .
Cross-linking of the BCR induces a cascade of biochemical events mediated by transient phosphorylations and interactions of various signaling proteins , including protein tyrosine kinases , phosphatases , and adaptor molecules ( 8 ) .
However , it is still unclear how these intracellular biochemical events are regulated to induce different cellular responses , e.g .
, proliferation or apoptosis .
Particularly , BCR-mediated signal transduction mechanisms in bursal B cells have been poorly characterized .
To better understand mechanisms for the induction and regulation of B cell proliferation , diversification , death , or survival in the bursa , we adopted a strategy of identifying proteins selectively expressed in bursal B cells .
Here we describe the molecular cloning of one such protein , BASH , a B cell adaptor containing an SH2 domain , and provide evidence suggesting that BASH is a signaling component downstream of BCR-associated tyrosine kinases .
Materials and Methods Antibodies The anti-chicken IgM Ab , M4 , was provided from Dr. C.-L. H. Chen ( University of Alabama at Birmingham , AL ) .
The anti-porcine Syk polyclonal antiserum , which was shown to cross-react with chicken Syk ( 9 ) , was a gift from Dr. T. Kurosaki ( Kansai Medical University , Osaka , Japan ) .
The anti-T7 epitope Ab , anti-phosphotyrosine ( pY ) Ab ( RC20 ) , and polyclonal anti-Shc Ab directed against the SH2 domain of human She were purchased from Novagen ( Madison , WI ) , Signal Transduction Laboratories ( Lexington , KY ) , and Upstate Biotechnology ( Lake Placid , NY ) , respectively .
Isolation of chicken BASH cDNA and construction of an expression plasmid The cDNA from chicken bursal B cells was subtracted by the cDNA from spleen lymphocytes using the PCR-select cDNA subtraction kit ( Clontech , Palo Alto , CA ) , and the subtracted PCR products were cloned into pCR2.1 3 Abbreviations used in this paper : BCR ; B cell Ag receptor , NF-AT ; Nuclear factor of activated T cells , pY ; phosphotyrosine ; BASH , B cell adaptor containing an SH2 domain .
0022-1767/98/ $ 02.00 6107 '01 4epy uo 1san8 4q jountwrut { 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor ; The Journal of Immunology vector ( Invitrogen , San Diego , CA ) .
To further screen differentially expressed products , the subtracted fragments were run on an agarose gel and immobilized on duplicate nylon membrane filters , and then hybridized to cDNA probes derived from either a DT4O B cell line or a 132B T cell line poly ( A ) * RNA .
One of the subtracted cDNA fragments hybridized with the DT4O cell cDNA probe but not to the 132B cell cDNA probe was used to screen a DT4O cDNA library constructed in AZAP-XR ( Stratagene , La Jolla , CA ) .
The positive clones were subjected to sequencing by the dideoxy-chain termination method with an automatic DNA sequencer ( Ap-plied Biosystems , Foster City , CA ) .
A full-length cDNA encoding the short-form of BASH was ligated in-frame with N-terminal double T7 epitope tag in pAT7neo expression vector , which was driven by the chicken B-actin promoter ( pAT7neo-BASH ) .
Details of restriction maps and cloning sites of the construct are available upon request .
Northern blot and in situ hybridization analysis Total RNA samples ( 10 ug ) extracted from tissues and cell lines were electrophoresed in 1.2 M formaldehyde/1.2 % agarose gel and transferred to nylon membranes .
The blots were hybridized with a *°P-labeled 900-bp chicken BASH cDNA fragment initially isolated by the subtraction .
Whole-mount in situ hybridization was performed essentially as described ( 10 ) .
Digoxigenin-labeled sense and anti-sense 900-bp BASH riboprobes were produced with the Digoxigenin RNA Labeling Kit ( Boehringer Mannheim , Mannheim , Germany ) according to the manufacturer 's instruc-tion .
After whole-mount in situ hybridization , tissues were embedded in Tissue-Tek ( Miles , Elkhart , IN ) , frozen in liquid nitrogen , and sectioned at 10 m on a Leiz cryostat .
Sections were mounted with Mowiol , and photographed on a Olympass BX30 Nomarwsky microscope ( Tokyo , Japan ) .
Immunoprecipitations and immunoblot analysis DT4O cells were electroporated with pAT7neo-BASH and then stable clones expressing T7-tagged BASH protein were selected by G418 ( 2 mg/ ml ) .
These clones were stimulated with the anti-chicken IgM Ab ( 15 ug/ ml ) at 40°C for the indicated period of time and then lysed at 2 X 10 `` cells/ml in the lysis buffer containing 1 % NP4O , 10 mM Tris , pH 7.8 , 150 mM NaCl , 2 mM EDTA , and protease and phosphatase inhibitors .
The lysates were immunoprecipitated with the indicated Abs and then analyzed by Western blotting with the indicated Abs and secondary Abs conjugated with horseradish peroxidase .
Immunoreactive proteins were detected by ECL kit ( Amersham , Arlington Heights , IL ) .
COS7 cells ( 5 X 10° ) were cotransfected with 1 ug of pAT7neo-BASH with either 1 ug of pME-Lyn , pME-Syk ( gifts from Dr. H. Nishizumi , Institute of Medical Science , University of Tokyo , Tokyo , Japan ) , or both plasmids using a TransIT-LT1 transfection reagent ( Pan Vera , Masison , WI ) .
After the incubation for 48 h , cell lysates were prepared and analyzed for tyrosine phosphorylation as described above .
Luciferase assay DT40O cells were cotransfected with 10 pug of a luciferase reporter plasmid driven by seven tandem copies of the NF of activated T cells ( NF-AT ) response element from the mouse IL-2 gene promoter ( NF-AT-Luc ; a gift from Dr. K. Arai , Institute of Medical Science , University of Tokyo ) , together with 15 ug of either empty pAT7neo or pAT7neo-BASH in serum-free RPMI 1640 at a density of 10 `` cells/400 pl per cuvette with a gene pulser ( Bio-Rad Laboratories , Richmond , CA ) set at 250 V and 975 LF .
After electroporation , the cells were transferred to complete RPMI 1640 and incubated at 40°C for 48 h. Triplicates of 5 X 10° viable cells were then stimulated with anti-IgM Ab and subsequently assayed for luciferase activity , as described previously ( 11 ) .
Light emission was measured in a Lumat LB9501 luminometer ( Berthold , Wildbad , Germany ) .
Results and Discussion Isolation of a cDNA fragment whose mRNA is preferentially expressed in B cells of the bursa of Fabricius We sought to clarify the molecular basis of the unique bursal differentiation process by identifying genes selectively expressed in bursal B cells through PCR-based subtraction combined with differential hybridization .
One positive cDNA clone , designated B-1-2 , hybridized to a 2.5-kb mRNA transcript that was abundantly expressed in the bursa , not in thymus , bone marrow , or other tissues , except for a low level of expression in spleen and ovary ( Fig .
14 ) .
All chicken B cell lines , but no T cell lines expressed this mRNA transcript , although the level of the expression was highly variable among B cell lines .
High levels of transcripts & x & a b 1.3= ww # # 000 | « ~ p & s EC ¢ £ BASH FIGURE 1 .
The expression pattern of BASH mRNA .
A , Northern blot analysis of total RNA from chicken tissues .
The blots were hybridized with the B-1-2 cDNA probe ( top ) and reprobed with the chicken B-actin cDNA ( bottom ) .
B , Northern blot analysis of total RNA from chicken cell lines .
B cell lines are CL-18 , DT4O0 , TLT1 , 293 B9 , and 24914 ; T cell lines are RP1 , JP2 , and MSB1 .
C , Whole-mount in situ hybridization analysis of the bursa of Fabricius , showing that B-1-2 transcripts are localized at B cell follicles .
D , Transverse section of the sample in C. were detectable in immature B cell lines such as DT4O and CL18 , in which gene conversion persists ( 12 ) , and TLT-1 , whose Ig light chain gene is in germline configuration .
In contrast , very low levels of transcripts were detected in relatively mature B cell lines , such as 293B9 and 249L4 ( Fig .
1B ) .
In situ hybridization analysis revealed a strong positive signal in B cell follicles in the bursa ( Fig .
1C ) , especially in medullar B cells surrounded by the follic-ular epithelium ( Fig .
1D ) .
BASH is a novel member of the family of signaling proteins containing SH2 domains Using a B-1-2 cDNA fragment as a probe , we isolated two full-length cDNA clones with different lengths ( GenBank/EMBL/ DDBJ accession number ABQ15289 ) .
The long-form cDNA contains the longest open reading frame encoding a 553-amino acid protein , with a calculated molecular mass of 62 kDa ( Fig .
2 ) .
The shorter form of cDNA lacks 57 nucleotides corresponding to the 6107 '01 4epy uo 1san8 4q jountwrut { 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor ; 5806 B 1 u fx fix x 1 Av o a -- -- -- - - omy s | MA LK NV PF RS Evia wa aout an yr be ex ay kigy®s so 23 oer : xrxquxQJL cfr exit wo rc 8 41 IBJGARF LN LT EDI OLP KLRMPIMLSISL NENE ERRS & e so 62 -- -rrfs nurnﬁsnﬂnmgq bdr o Do x s Bie flo CB 8 0 sg| IF ccs - r pp [ LJ B 98 sEsE -- -mvaEu -- —PF -- xﬁxxntpa s i120 PhieBipnerkss E qa Lv piJa a npf® a no s ® B 130 all-El sr r @ s xxo Lﬁrupnps mEssapxp 8 iso -s FENT N8MY ID RGEGrt offvs oo pvr rH - pease a @ LJ B 170 91.5951 ?
LEKEREC snﬂnn ‘ n VEVDHDNYIEPT s 197 orpgogreranmm -- - 210 & sfr or r a RFA ex : s s yes sinn no cide 22 ; arpQt or s rain ols nado o - - te- - - - - - 250 TRF ofis as sBsp rp rHr +- ATRA ) pF sDigp sa pMioer zx Lp K1 ome GP KL DA SR NI LP N RL HHE T E A NES FS NT 2 s vBikz or of- - fir rsfioeppyie ao 1p 120 aAﬂPSPLERnLKSNA KP CLP a 111 sNTFE- -- sRS- -- Mods -- -- - K N P L 60 we or pr apis as sa sr ee rgxs s cf ovis ; Ar MP oArs®Es NI roo sa che- -- neg- -- gi 103 V ?
?
?
s RAG Ts pfs s 1 SE : s s v a PPA cf sxAA ' I-c a ; RS RN LPIMP VP NRPQPPEPG -- -EEET 110 ofx a [ ore y s 5x ora c o od B rin® 23 Thie £ ( a Pos x 1 flo Mor do Bex x r a an A - Pa B 489 PEIESRQAR EKCEBERED == ofA 8 468 o BB y o Bz s o vB Ms cr « Bx Boc alt p xr ax B 529 rs s 8 503 ur gu erxfjre acc FIGURE 2 .
Deduced amino acid sequences of chicken BASH ( B ) , aligned with mouse SLP-76 ( S ) .
Identical and similar amino acids are indicated by black and gray shading , respectively .
Dashes denote gaps introduced to optimize similarity .
The numbers in the Teff column indicate the position of amino acid residues .
The amino acid residues missing in the short-form of BASH are indicated by a dashed line above the sequence .
Tyrosine residues in the potential SH2 domain-binding motifs are shown by closed circles above the sequence .
The SH2 domain is underlined .
19 amino acids located at the N terminus of the long-form protein .
These two forms of mRNA transcripts were detectable in the bursa as well as DT4O cells by PCR using a pair of primers flanking the deleted portion ( data not shown ) , although we could not assess the corresponding protein species expressed in B cells due to the lack of a discriminating Ab .
The two predicted proteins contain N-terminal acidic domains with seven potential phosphotyrosine-based binding motifs for SH2 domains ( 13 , 14 ) and a putative SH2 domain in the C-terminal region .
The intervening region between the two domains is rich in proline residues and may represent binding sites for proteins containing an SH3 domain ( 15 ) .
Based on these molecular characteristics , this protein was termed BASH ( B cell-specific adaptor containing an SH2 domain ) .
A database search revealed substantial sequence similarity between BASH and mouse SLP-76 , a tyrosine-phosphorylated he-matopoietic cell-specific protein ( 16 ) .
The SH2 domain of BASH shows high homology to that of mouse SLP-76 ( 42 % identity ) .
Among seven potential phosphotyrosine-based binding motifs for SH2 domains , three motifs ( positions of tyrosine residues : 91 , 103 , and 115 in the long-form ) are conserved between BASH and SLP-76 ( Fig .
2 ) .
BASH is tyrosine-phosphorylated after cross-linking of surface-IgM on B cells Because SLP-76 is known to be tyrosine-phosphorylated upon TCR-cross-linking ( 16 ) , we examined whether BASH is phosphor-ylated upon BCR stimulation .
The T7-epitope tagged BASH CUTTING EDGE cDNA was transfected into DT4O cells , and then the BASH protein was analyzed by immunoprecipitation with anti-tag Ab .
The BASH protein was found to migrate on SDS-PAGE with an apparent molecular mass of 85 kDa , which is larger than the predicted molecular mass of 60 kDa plus the additional 4 kDa of the T7-epitope tag .
The anomalous migration may result from post-translational modification or the abundance of charged amino acids present in the protein .
Maximal BCR-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of BASH was detectable after 1 min and was sustained for at least 15 min after BCR stimulation ( Fig .
3A ) .
In addition , we found that lysates of the stimulated DT4O cells contained several additional tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins ( ~70 kDa , 52 kDa , and 46 kDa ) , which were specifically coprecipitated with BASH .
Association of BASH with She and Syk By blotting the BASH immunoprecipitate with Abs against known tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins , we found that the 52-kDa BASH-associated phosphoprotein reacted with an anti-human She Ab , suggesting an association of BASH with the chicken She homologue .
Although this association was seen before stimulation , it was significantly enhanced after BCR cross-linking ( Fig .
3B ) .
The 70-kDa phosphoprotein bound to BASH was identified as Syk ; BASH was detectable in the anti-Syk immunoprecipitate , and Syk was coimmunoprecipitated with BASH .
The BASH-Syk association was enhanced by BCR-stimulation ( Fig .
3C ) .
Both Syk and Lyn are required for the maximal phosphorylation of BASH To identify the tyrosine kinases responsible for the phosphorylation of BASH following BCR cross-linking , COS7 cells were cotransfected with a BASH plasmid and plasmids encoding Syk and Lyn .
Anti-phosphotyrosine immunoblots of the BASH-immuno-precipitate from these cell lysates revealed that coexpression of either Syk or Lyn induced only a very weak tyrosine phosphorylation of BASH ( Fig .
3D ) .
In contrast , coexpression of Syk and Lyn dramatically increased the tyrosine phosphorylation of BASH , indicating that both kinases are required for maximal activity .
Overexpression of BASH interferes with NF-AT activation upon BCR-stimulation Because SLP-76 , a potential T-cell counterpart of BASH , has been demonstrated to augment TCR signals leading to IL-2 promoter and NFE-AT activation ( 17 , 18 ) , we examined whether overexpression of BASH influences the activation of NF-AT , which is also involved in BCR-mediated transcriptional events ( 19 ) .
In contrast to the positive effect of SLP-76 on NF-AT activation in T cells , overexpression of BASH resulted in significant suppression of NF-AT activation when compared with transfection of the control vector ( Fig .
4 ) .
This finding suggests that BASH may play an inhibitory role in a BCR-mediated signaling pathway leading to the activation of NF-AT .
The presence of SH2 and proline-rich domains as well as several potential SH2-binding sites in BASH , in addition to its BCR-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation and association with Syk and presumably with Shc , suggests that BASH functions as an adaptor protein interacting with multiple signaling molecules in BCR-mediated signaling .
The abundant expression of BASH in B cells of the bursa of Fabricius , together with its functional involvement in BCR-mediated signal transduction , suggests a critical role of BASH in the regulation of B cell development in the bursa .
Very recently , novel mammalian B cell-specific adaptor proteins , BLNK ( 20 ) and SLP-65 ( 21 ) , have been described .
These proteins are very homologous to BASH , particularly in the N-terminal and SH2 domains , although the length and homology of 6107 '01 4epy uo 1san8 4q jountwrut { 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor ; The Journal of Immunology A BCR-stimulation ( min ) kDa o 1 5 15 97.4- « ae m C `` BASH 66- < Blot : anti-pY | pomme ) == IP : anti- T7 B - BCR-stimulation C BCR-stimulation = + = + kDa o 44 gem +- BASH nﬁ BASH 66 .
a uli IP : anti-Syk # > mak Blot : anti-~ t [ E IP : anti- T7 IP : anti- T7 Blot : anti-Syk Blot : anti-pY +- Shc IP : anti- T7 Blot : anti-Shc ¢ s 34 _ a P _ `` /* __/ Cad < i Blot : anti-pY & -amam ~ gwouth am- » | Blot : anti- 17 IP : anti- T7 FIGURE 3 .
BASH is tyrosine-phosphorylated after BCR stimulation and associates with Shc and Syk .
A , Tyrosine phosphorylation of BASH .
DT4O cells stably transfected with a T7-tagged BASH cDNA ( DT4O/ BASH ) were stimulated with anti-IgM Ab for the indicated periods of time .
Whole-cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with an anti-T7 Ab , immunoblotted with an anti-phosphotyrosine Ab ( top ) and reprobed with an anti-T7 Ab ( bottom ) .
B , Coimmunoprecipitation of She with BASH .
Lysates of DT40/BASH cells , either unstimulated or stimulated with anti-Ig M mAb for 1 min , were immunoprecipitated with an anti-T7 Ab and then probed with anti-phosphotyrosine Ab ( top ) or anti-Shc Ab ( bottom ) .
C , Coimmunoprecipitation of Syk with BASH .
Immunoprecipitates of unstimulated and stimulated ( anti-IgM , 1 min ) DT40/BASH cells with anti-T7 ( bottom ) or anti-Syk ( top ) Abs were reciprocally probed with the same Abs .
D , Lysates from COS7 cells transfected with expression vectors for T7-tagged BASH , Lyn , or Syk in the indicated combinations were immunoprecipitated with anti-T7 Ab and immunoblotted with an anti-phosphotyrosine Ab ( ¢op ) or an anti-T7 Ab ( bottom ) .
5807 NF- AT activity Na l ho & Fold induction & n = ] 5 04 -A-o -- mmMP Mock BASH Mock BASH Unstimulated Stimulated with anti- IgM mAb FIGURE 4 .
Overexpession of BASH inhibits BCR-mediated NF-AT activation .
DT4O cells were cotransfected with NF-AT-Luc plasmid and either the empty vector or a BASH expression vector .
After 48 h , cells were either left unstimulated or stimulated with anti-IgM Ab for 6 h and subsequently assayed for luciferase activity .
The results are shown as the fold induction of luciferase activity as compared with the activity in unstimulated cells transfected with empty plasmid .
Luciferase activity was determined in triplicate in the experiment .
the intervening region have diverged considerably between BLNK/SLP-65 and BASH .
In contrast to BASH , BLNK does not associate with She and augments NF-AT activation following BCR-stimulation ( 20 ) , suggesting that BASH may not simply be a homologue of BLNK/SLP-65 .
Moreover , the expression patterns of the proteins are quite different .
BASH is found primarily in immature B cell lines and is expressed only weakly in mature B cells , while the converse is true of BLNK/SLP-65 .
Therefore , BASH may have evolved to fulfill unique functions in developing B cells in the avian bursa .
Acknowledgments We thank Dr. H. Nishizumi for providing pME-Lyn and pME-Syk plas-mids ; Dr. K. Arai for a gift of NF-AT luciferase plasmid ; Dr. T. Kurosaki for anti-Syk antisera ; Dr. C.-L. H. Chen for M4 mAb ; and Dr. F. P. Zavala , Dr. P. D. Burrows and his colleague for critical reading of the manuscript .
References 1 .
Masteller , E. L. , G. T. Pharr , P. E. Funk , and C. B. Thompson .
1997 .
Avian B cell development .
Int .
Rev .
Immunol .
15:185 .
2 .
Reynaud , C.-A .
, B. Bertocci , A. Dahan , and J.-C. Weill .
1994 .
Formation of the chicken B-cell repertoire : ontogenesis , regulation of Ig gene rearrangement , and diversification by gene conversion .
Adv .
Immunol .
57:353 .
3 .
Lassila , O .
1989 .
Emigration of B cells from chicken bursa of Fabricius .
Eur .
J. Immunol .
19:955 .
4 .
Motyka , B. , and J. D. Reynold .
1991 .
Apoptosis is associated with the extensive B cell death in the sheep ileal Peyer 's patch and the chicken bursa of Fabricius : possible role in B cell selection .
Eur .
J. Immunol .
21:1951 .
5 .
Lam , K. P. , R. Kubn , and K. Rajewsky .
1997 .
In vivo ablation of surface immunoglobulin on mature B cells by inducible gene targeting results in rapid cell death .
Cell 90:1073 .
6 .
Paramithiotis , E. , K. A. Jacobsen , and M. J. Ratcliffe .
1995 .
Loss of surface immunoglobulin expression precedes B cell death by apoptosis in the bursa of Fabricius .
J. Exp .
Med .
181:105 .
7 .
Ratcliffe , M. J. H. , and L. Tkalec .
1990 .
Cross-linking of the surface immunoglobulin on lymphocytes from the bursa of Fabricius results in second messenger generation .
Eur .
J. Immunol .
20 : 1073 .
8 .
DeFranco , A. L. 1997 .
The complexity of signaling pathways activated by the BCR .
Curr .
Opin .
Immunol .
9:296 .
9 .
Takata , M. , H. Sabe , A. Hata , T. Inazu , Y. Homma , T. Nukada , H. Yamamura , and T. Kurosaki .
1994 .
Tyrosine kinases Lyn and Syk regulate B cell receptor-coupled Ca** mobilization through distinct pathways .
EMBO J .
13:1341 .
6107 '01 4epy uo 1san8 4q jountwrut { 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor ; 5808 10 .
11 .
12 .
13 .
14 .
15 .
Nieto , M. A. , K. Patel , and D. G. Wilkinson .
1996 .
In situ hybridization analysis of chick embryos in whole mount and tissue sections .
Methods Cell Biol .
51:219 .
Katsuta , H. , S. Tsuji , Y. Nibo , T. Kurosaki , and D. Kitamura .
1998 .
Lyn-medi-ated down-regulation of B cell antigen receptor signaling : inhibition of protein kinase C activation by Lyn in a kinase-independent fashion .
J. Immunol .
160 : 1547 .
Buceerstedde , J. , C.-A .
Reynaud , E. H. Humphries , W. Olson , D. L. Ewert , and J.-C. Weil .
1990 .
Light chain gene conversion continues at high rate in an ALV-induced cell line .
EMBO J .
9:921 .
Songyang , Z. , S. E. Shoelson , J. McGlade , P. Olivier , T. Pawson , X. R. Bustelo , M. Barbacid , H. Sabe , H. Hanafusa , T. Yi , R. Ren , D. Baltimore , S. Ratnofsky , R. A. Feldman , and L. C. Cantley .
1994 .
Specific motifs recognized by the SH2 domains of Csk , 3BP2 , fps/fes , GRB-2 , HCP , SHC , Syk , and Vav .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
14:2777 .
Songyang , Z. , S. E. Shoelson , M. Chaudhuri , G. Gish , T. Pawson , W. G. Haser , F. King , T. Roberts , S. Ratnofsky , R. J. Lechleider , B. G. Neel , R. B. Birge , J. E. Fajardo , M. M. Chou , H. Hanafusa , B. Schaffhausen , and L. C. Cantley .
1993 .
SH2 domains recognize specific phosphopeptide sequences .
Cell 72:767 .
Sparks , A .
B. , J. E. Rider , N. G. Hoffman , D. M. Fowlkes , L. A. Quilliam , and B. K. Kay .
1996 .
Distinct ligand preferences of Src homology 3 domains from 16 .
17 .
18 .
19 .
20 .
21 .
CUTTING EDGE Src , Yes , Abl , Cortactin , p53bp2 , PLC+y , Crk , and Grb2 .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 93:1540 .
Jackman , J. K. , D. G. Motto , Q .
Sun , M. Takemoto , C. W. Turck , G. A. Peltz , G. A. Koretzky , and P. R. Findell .
1995 .
Molecular cloning of SLP-76 , a 76-kDa tyrosine phosphoprotein associated with Grb2 in T cells .
J. Biol .
Chem .
270 : 7029 .
Fang , N. , D. G. Motto , S. E. Ross , and G. A. Koretzky .
1996 .
Tyrosines 113 , 128 , 145 of SLP-76 are required for optimal augmentation of NF-AT promoter activity .
J. Immunol .
157:3769 .
Motto , D. G. , S. E. Ross , J. Wu , L. R. Hendricks-Taylor , and G. A. Koretzky .
1996 .
Implication of the Grb2-associated phosphoprotein SLP-76 in T cell re-ceptor-mediated interleukin 2 production .
J. Exp .
Med .
183:1937 .
Venkataraman , L. , D. A. Francis , Z. Wang , J. Liu , T. L. Rothstein , and R. Sen. 1994 .
Cyclosporin-A sensitive induction of NF-AT in murine B cells .
Immunity 1:189 .
Fu , C. , C. W. Turck , T. Kurosaki , and A. C. Chan .
1998 .
BLNK : a central linker protein in B cell activation .
Immunity 9:93 .
Wicnands , J. , J. Schweikert , B. Wollscheid , H. Jumaa , P. J. Nielsen , and M. Reth .
1998 .
SLP-65 : a new signaling component in B lymphocytes which requires expression of the antigen receptor for phosphorylation .
J. Exp .
Med .
188:791 .
6107 '01 4epy uo 1san8 4q jountwrut { 'mmmy ; / : dyy wor ;
