JouRrNAL or VirRoLOoGY , Mar .
1999 , p. 2064-2073 0022-538 X/99/ $ 04.00+0 Vol .
73 , No .
3 Copyright © 1999 , American Society for Microbiology .
All Rights Reserved .
High-Level Replication of Human Immunodeficiency Virus in Thymocytes Requires NF- « B Activation through Interaction with Thymic Epithelial Cells LAURENT CHENE , MARIE-THERESE NUGEYRE , FRANCOISE BARRE-SINOUSSL , AND NICOLE ISRAEL* Unité de Biologie des Rétrovirus , Institut Pasteur , 75724 Paris Cedex 15 , France Received 6 August 1998/Accepted 23 November 1998 We have previously demonstrated that interaction of infected thymocytes with autologous thymic epithelial cells ( TEC ) is a prerequisite for a high level of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 ( HIV-1 ) replication in thymocytes ( M. Rothe , L. Chéne , M. Nugeyre , F. Barré-Sinoussi , and N. Israél , J. Virol .
72:5852-5861 , 1998 ) .
We report here that this activation of HIV replication takes place at the transcriptional level through activation of the Rel/NF-B transcription factors .
We first demonstrate that an HIV-1 provirus ( SF-2 strain ) very effectively replicates in thymocytes cocultured with TEC whereas this provirus , with xB sites deleted , fails to replicate .
We provide evidence that several NF-KB complexes are constitutively found in the nuclei of thymocytes either freshly isolated from the thymus or maintained in coculture with autologous or heterologous TEC .
The prevalent complex is the heterodimer p50-p65 .
NF-B activity is tightly correlated with the transcriptional activity of a long terminal repeat ( LTR ) of HIV-1 transfected in thymocytes .
The cotransfection of this LTR with a mutated IxBa molecule formally demonstrates that LTR transactivation is regulated by members of the Rel/NF-B family in thymocytes .
We also showed that tumor necrosis factor ( TNF ) and to a lesser extent interleukin-1 ( IL-1 ) , secreted within the coculture , induce NF-KB activity and a correlative LTR transactivation .
However IL-7 , a crucial factor for thymopoiesis that is secreted mainly by TEC , is a necessary cofactor for NF-KB activation elicited by TNF or IL-1 .
Together , these data indicate that NF-KB activation , required for a high level of HIV replication in thymocytes , is regulated in a specific manner in the thymic microenvironment which provides the necessary cytokines : TNF , IL-1 , and IL-7 .
One explanation ( 24 , 61 ) for the depletion in the number of CD4* T lymphocytes , which is the hallmark of human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) infection , is the exhaustion of the T-cell turnover , which has to occur at a very high rate to replace the cells permanently destroyed by the virus ( 9 ) .
This high-turnover model does not take into account the possible impairment of T-cell renewal caused by HIV infection of primary lymphoid organs ( 20 , 40 ) .
A number of studies suggested a correlation between the rapid progression toward AIDS of some pediatric seropositive patients and thymic alterations including a profound disorganization of the epithelial network ( 28 , 45 , 47 ) and thymocyte depletion .
Furthermore , antiretro-viral treatment applied to HIV-infected SCID-hu mice did not lead to a complete renewal of the mature thymocyte population , underlining the possibility of an impairment either of progenitor thymocyte function or of stromal cell function ( 65 ) .
To better understand the pathogenesis of HIV infection in the thymus , it is important to identify the stimuli and mechanisms controlling the virus replication and spreading within this or-gan .
Most thymocytes are susceptible to HIV infection in vitro ( 58-60 ) and in the SCID-hu mouse model ( 2 , 32 , 54 , 56 ) .
We previously determined the factors physiologically involved in the control of HIV replication in thymocytes .
We showed that interaction of infected thymocytes with thymic epithelial cells ( TEC ) is a prerequisite for a high level of HIV replication in thymocytes .
We determined that this cell-to-cell contact , while necessary , is not per se the effector of HIV replication but , * Corresponding author .
Mailing address : Unité de Biologie des Rétrovirus , Institut Pasteur , 28 rue du Dr Roux , 75724 Paris Cedex 15 , France .
Phone : 33 1 45 68 89 44/87 33 .
Fax : 33 1 45 68 89 57 .
E-mail : nisrael @ pasteur.fr .
2064 rather , that soluble factors present in the coculture synergize to induce HIV replication ( 48 ) .
Two types of factors were identified according to their role , either in cell activation ( such as tumor necrosis factor [ TNF ] , interleukin-1 [ IL-1 ] , and IL-6 ) ( 67 ) or in cell proliferation or protection against apoptosis ( such as granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor [ GM-CSF ] ) ( 3 , 27 , 31 ) .
The requirement for TNF and to a lesser extent for IL-1 in HIV replication during the coculture of thymocytes and TEC suggests that a major role of this interaction might be the induction of NF-kB activation , which in turn would activate transcription from the two xB sites present in the HIV-1 long terminal repeat ( LTR ) .
NF- « B is composed of homodimers and heterodimers of members of the Rel/NF-kB family .
To date , five proteins belonging to the NF-kB family have been identified : p65 , c-Rel , RelB , p50/p105 , and p52/p100 ( 5 , 33 , 39 ) .
NF- « B dimers are sequestered in the cytosol of unstimulated cells via interactions with a family of inhibitory proteins called IxBs ( IxBa , IxBB , and IxBg ) ( 64 ) .
Following activation by various immune system and inflammatory stimuli , IxB molecules are degraded through the ubiquitin-proteasome path-way , thus allowing nuclear translocation of NF-kB and activation of its target genes ( 39 ) .
To verify the hypothesis that thymic microenvironment controls HIV replication at the transcriptional level , we used autologous mixed culture of TEC and thymocytes as previously described ( 48 ) .
We first demonstrated that NF- « B activation is a prerequisite for a high level of HIV replication in thymocytes , since a provirus with its two kB sites deleted failed to replicate even in coculture with TEC .
We then dissected the mechanism underlying this activation process .
We first demonstrated that coculture with TEC led to the induction of voL .
73 , 1999 nuclear NF-kB complexes in thymocytes .
The relevance of these NF-kB complexes was demonstrated by specific inhibition of LTR transactivation by a mutated form of the IxBa constitutively inhibiting NF-kB .
We also showed that TNF could not replace the activating effect of the coculture and that IL-7 , a TEC-secreted factor crucial for thymopoiesis ( 21 , 22 , 46 ) , was required to obtain a strong and prolonged TNF-induced NF-xB activity .
We provide correlative evidence that the association of these two cytokines is sufficient to induce the transactivation of the NF-B-dependent HIV LTR .
Taking the results together , we show here that cytokines provided by different cell types within the thymus combine their effects to sustain a high level of HIV transcription in thymocytes through NF- « B activation .
MATERIALS AND METHODS Reagents .
( i ) Antibodies .
To characterize both TEC and thymocytes popula-tions , the monoclonal antibodies ( MAbs ) used were against CD3 ( X35 ) , CD7 ( 8H8,1 ) , CD14 ( RMOS2 ) , CD83 ( HB15A ) , cytokeratin ( KL1 ) , and vimentin ( vim3B4 ) .
Immunoglobulin G1 ( IgG1 ) ( MARK1 ) and IgG2a ( U7.27 ) were used as negative controls .
All these antibodies were purchased from Immunotech ( Marseilles , France ) , except vim3B4 , which was purchased from Bochringer Mannheim ( Meylan , France ) .
Conjugated MAbs , including CD4-phycoerythrin ( PE ) ( 13B8.2 ) , CD8-fluorescein isothicyanate ( FITC ) ( B9.11 ) , control IgG1-PE ( 679.1Mc7 ) and IgG1-FITC ( 679.1Mc7 ) , goat-anti-rabbit-FITC , and goat-anti-mouse-FITC , were purchased from Immunotech .
Rabbit polyclonal serum against TNF was kindly provided by J.-M. Cavaillon , Pasteur Institute ( Paris , France ) .
IL-1 receptor antagonist ( IL-1ra ) and mouse MAb against IL-7 were purchased from R & D Systems ( Minneapolis , Minn. ) .
MAb against IL-1B ( B-A15 ) was purchased from Diaclone Research ( Besangon , France ) .
Mouse MAb against IL-6 ( AH65 ) and mouse MAb against the a chain of the IL-7 receptor ( IL-7Ra ) CDw127 ( R34.34 ) were purchased from Immunotech .
( ii ) Cytokines .
Human recombinant cytokines GM-CSF , IL-1 $ , and TNFa were purchased from Genzyme Corp. ( Cambridge , Mass . )
.
IL-6 and IL-7 were purchased from R & D Systems .
Plasmids .
All reporter constructs and plasmids used in this work have been previously described .
Briefly , the LTR-luc construct carries the luciferase reporter gene under the control of the U3R ( Be/ [ I-HindIII fragment ) of the HIV-1y L 4 ; LTR ( 19 ) .
The 3Enh-TK-lue construct contains three copies of a synthetic oligonucleotide encompassing the two 10-bp repeats of the HIV-1y ar enhancer ( -107 to -76 ) cloned upstream of the truncated thymidine kinase ( TK ) promoter ( -105 to +51 ) of herpes simplex virus in a TK-luc expression vector ( 19 ) .
LTRAxB was obtained by insertion into the pC-luciferase plasmid ( 52 ) of the Xhol-HindIII fragment of the HIV-1y 1a ; LTR from the original construct of Leonard et al .
with the two « B motifs deleted ( 35 ) .
The CMV-tat plasmid carries the tat cDNA inserted downstream of the human cytomegalovi-rus ( CMV ) immediate-early enhancer/promoter ( 19 ) .
The EF1-Bgal construct , containing the B-galactosidase reporter gene under the control of the basal promoter of elongation factor EF1e , was kindly provided by S. Mémet ( Pasteur Institute , Paris , France ) .
The construct IxBa-DN , carrying the cDNA of IxBa protein mutated on serines 32 and 36 under the control of the CMV early promoter , was kindly provided by N. Rice ( 63 ) .
ReCMV ( Invitrogen BV ) was the corresponding control vector which contains no cDNA sequence .
Cells and culture conditions .
( i ) Isolation of enriched human populations of TEC and thymocytes .
Fresh thymus fragments were obtained during elective cardiac surgery on HIV-1-seronegative children ( aged 6 days to 24 months ) .
The enrichment procedures for thymocytes and TEC have been described previously ( 48 ) .
Cells were then characterized at day 3 after thymus excision , using different selective markers ( with the various antibodies listed above ) , indicating that these populations of TEC and thymocytes were respectively purified at 95 and 99 % ( 48 ) .
Prior to mixed culture , TEC were maintained in a selective medium ( McCoy 's 5A [ GIBCO ] containing 10 % fetal calf serum [ FCS ] , 1 mM 1-Glu , 50 pg of penicillin-streptomycin per ml , 100 ug of neomycin per ml , 0.25 pg of Fun-gizone per ml , 20 ng of epidermal growth factor per ml , 5 X 10~° M cholera toxin , 500 ng of hydrocortisone per ml , and 5 X 10~° M B-mercaptocethanol ) .
Thymocytes were stored at +4°C in McCoy 's 5A supplemented with antibiotics , L-glutamine , 10 mM HEPES , and 20 % FCS .
( ii ) Mixed culture of TEC and thymocytes .
Autologous or heterologous cocultures of TEC and infected or control thymocytes were carried out 3 days after thymic excision either under conditions permitting cell-to-cell contact or in transwell chambers ( 0.45-um pore diameter ) .
The ratio of TEC to thymocytes was 1/25 .
The coculture medium was McCoy 's 5A supplemented with antibiotics , 1 mM 1-glutamine , 10 mM HEPES , and 10 % FCS .
IL-6 and GM-CSF were used at 10 ng/ml , TNF-a and IL-1 were used at 5 ng/ml , and IL-7 was used at 1 ng/ml .
MAb against IL-6 was used at 20 pg/ml , and polyclonal antibody against TNF NF- « B-DEPENDENT HIV-1 REPLICATION IN THYMUS - 2065 was used at a serum dilution of 1/300 .
IL-1ra was used at 20 ug/ml .
Cytokines or cytokine inhibitors were added at the start of the coculture , except antibody against IL-7Re .
The thymocytes were preincubated with the antibody against IL-7Ra ( 5 pg/ml per 8 X 10° thymocytes ) for 6 h at 4°C before their coculture with TEC .
In some experiments , the thymocyte culture was supplemented with 50 % ( vol/vol ) noninfected TEC conditioned medium ( CM ) obtained after 72 h of TEC culture and then centrifuged and filtered through a 0.45-pm-pore-size membrane .
In experiments with IL-7 antibody , TEC CM was preincubated for 6 h at 4°C with 10 pg of the antibody per ml before the onset of thymocyte culture .
Immunostaining and cytofluorometry .
Indirect immunostaining with antibodies against cytokeratin and vimentin was performed in Lab-Tech chambers ( Corning Costar Corp. , Cambridge , Mass . )
on cells permeabilized by acetone-methanol treatment ( 6 ) .
Other direct or indirect immunostaining was analyzed by cytofluorometry with an EPICS Profile II fluorometer ( Coulter ) .
Virus and infection procedure .
HIV-1 , , , and HIV-1 , .
; .
, , ... .
were obtained after transfection of Cos-7 cells with the corresponding provirus constructs ( 4 ) by using standard methods with Lipofectamine ( GIBCO ) .
HIV-1 , , , was obtained after transfection of the entire sequence ( 5'-3 ' ) of the molecular clone HIV-1 SF2 ( 48 ) .
obtained in the same way , differed from the wild-type construct by having a 5-bp substitution in the enhancer region of the viral LTR ( 17 ) .
The p24® `` `` protein was determined in cell-free supernatants by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay ( ELAVIA ; Diagnostics Pasteur ) and was used in the infection procedure immediately .
All infections were standardized to the p24 levels : 10 ng of p24 was used to infect 10° thymocytes .
Briefly , thymocytes were washed in RPMI and exposed either to HIV-1 , , , Or to HIV ig my ; for 1 h at 37°C .
After infection , the thymocytes were washed three times and cultured at a density of 8 X 10° per well ( 12-well plates ) in 2 ml of medium ( McCoy 's 5A supplemented with antibiotics , 10 % FCS , and 1 mM 1-Glu ) or cocultured with 5 X 10° TEC .
On days 6 , 8 , 11 , 13 , 15 , and 18 after the start of the coculture , 300 pl of supernatant were collected to determine the p24®** concentration and was replaced by the same volume of fresh medium .
Transfection procedure .
Thymocytes were maintained for 0 to 48 h in different culture or coculture conditions prior to transfection .
They were then transfected with 20 to 25 pg of plasmid ( s ) by electroporation in MacCoy 's 5A medium with 20 % FCS .
A single pulse at 875 V/cm and 960 wF was performed .
Expression vectors of the luciferase reporter gene were used , except for EF1-fgal , expressing B-galactosidase , which was used for standardization of transfections .
After transfection , the thymocytes were washed and were then returned for an additional 20 h to the previous dishes containing the conditioned medium of 48 h of culture .
At 20 h posttransfection , the luciferase and B-galactosidase activities were detected in the cell lysates .
Luciferase activity was measured by standard procedures , as previously described ( 52 ) , and B-galactosidase activity was measured by using the luminescent B-galactosidase genetic reporter system II ( Clon-tech , Palo Alto , Calif. ) .
Normalized luciferase activity represents the ratio of luciferase to B-galactosidase activities .
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay ( EMSA ) .
Total extracts were performed as previously described ( 26 ) .
Briefly , after 5 X 10° to 10 X 10° thymocytes cultured under different conditions were harvested , they were washed once in PBS 1 % ; 30 pl of lysis buffer was added , centrifugation ( 13,220 % g for 10 min ) was performed 10 min later , and the protein concentration in the supernatant was quantified by using the Bradford reagent ( Bio-Rad Laboratories , Ivry sur Seine , France ) .
For the band shift assay , the binding-reaction mixture was prepared by adding , in the following order , binding buffer ( 20 mM HEPES , 2 mM dithiothreitol , 60 mM KCl , 0.01 % Nonidet P-40 , 0.1 mg of bovine serum albu-min/ml , 4 % Ficoll ) , 0.4 pg of sonicated salmon sperm , 10 pg of protein extract , and 30,000 cpm of °°P-labelled DNA probe corresponding to 0.25 ng of probe .
The sequence of the oligonucleotide used is : 5° CTAGACGGGGATTTCCGAGAGGT TGCCCCTAAAGGCTCTICCAGATC 5 ' The NF- « B consensus binding sequence is in boldface type .
Specific binding was controlled by competition with a 40-fold ( 10-ng ) excess of the same nonlabeled oligonucleotide , added to the protein extract before the binding reaction was started .
To identify the subunits constituting NF- « B complexes , specific antibodies against p50 , p52 , p65 , c-Rel , and ReIB were used .
The p50 , p52 , p65 , and c-Rel antibodies were a kind gift from A .
( Pasteur Institute , Paris , France ) , and anti-ReIB was provided by Santa Cruz Biotechnology ( Santa Cruz , Calif. ) .
Antibodies were added to the protein extract , and the mixture was allowed to stand for 5 min at 4°C before incubation with the radiolabeled probe .
RESULTS Coculture-induced activation of HIV replication requires the two B sites within the HIV-1 LTR .
In an attempt to evaluate the relevance of NF- « B in the activation of HIV-1 replication in thymocytes , we compared the replication capacity of a virus mutated in the two xB sites within the LTR ( 4 , 18 ) with that of the corresponding wild-type virus .
Wild-type and 2066 CHENE ET AL .
8 ay € `` Ep E 6 .-a -S LS g ~- @ -- _ Thym .
wt n w $ 4 - & - _ Thym .
wt/TEC & S -- - - Thym .
xB-mut B0 $ 2 .. -O- Thym .
« B-mut / TEC e G 0 6 9 12 15 18 days post-infection FIG .
1 .
Coculture-induced activation of HIV replication requires the two xB sites within the HIV LTR .
Freshly isolated thymocytes were infected with viral supernatants produced after 48 h of culture of either wild-type ( wt ) or « B-mut proviral DNA-transfected Cos-7 cells .
Infected thymocytes were cultured alone ( Thym .
wt or Thym .
« B-mut ) or cocultured with TEC ( Thym .
wi/TEC or Thym .
« B-mut/TEC ) .
Viral replication was determined at various times postinfection by the detection of p24 antigen in the thymocyte culture or in the coculture medium .
The data shown here are representative of three independent experiments , each carried out on a different three thymus .
mutated ( AB ) viruses were obtained from the supernatant of Cos-7 cells transfected with the corresponding provirus constructs .
We then carried out infection of thymocytes and cocultured them with TEC under conditions previously described by Rothe et al .
( 48 ) .
As shown in Fig .
1 , the AB virus is unable to replicate in thymocytes even in the presence of TEC , in contrast to the wild-type .
These data suggest that NF- « B activity is required for HIV replication in thymocytes and that this activation is provided by their interaction with TEC .
Interaction with TEC permanently induces NF-KB activity in thymocytes .
We then determined whether NF- « B activity was present in the human thymus as a whole by performing EMSAs with protein extract from a thymus fragment immediately crushed after surgery and a probe representing the HIV-1 LTR « B-derived motifs .
As shown in Fig .
2A ( lane 2 [ control ] ) , we observed a specific binding activity of NF- « B complexes in this whole-cell extract .
This activity was also observed in whole-cell extracts from freshly isolated thymocytes ( lane 4 [ control ] ] .
The NF- « B activity , observed in freshly isolated thymocytes , was very probably present in these cells within the thymus ( since it was also detected in the thymus as a whole ) and was not induced by the enrichment procedure used for these cells .
The NF-kB activity represented specific DNA binding activities since they were competed by an excess of a nonradiolabeled kB probe ( lanes 1 and 3 ) .
This NF-kB activity decreased progressively when thymocytes were cultured alone ( Fig .
2A , lanes 5 and 6 ) .
The kinetics of this decrease in culture varies according to the different preparations of thymocytes obtained from different thymuses .
The minimal levels were observed at between 24 and 48 h of culture .
In any case , this activity was maintained when thymocytes were cocultivated with autologous TEC ( lanes 7 and 8 ) .
The same result was obtained with either autologous ( from 3 thymuses ) or heterologous ( from 10 thymuses ) TEC , indicating that induction of NF- « B activity did not result from cellular activation caused by a mixed lymphocyte reaction but was due J. Virou .
Thymocytes Whole thymus total extract _ Freshly Cultured __ Cocultured isolated alone with TEC +d +d & & a 8 £0 5 § 8 § 5 % E ® E .| ' ' a-nrFr-B a | 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 so P 3 8 % s ea m - & 2 B 5 § R % % % % & p50-65 50-ReIB Whole thymus .
.
.
.
.. P e .
< G-p50-50 + pall pl a » | < -n.s 1 I p50-65 p50-RelB mu | WW Wont thymocytes p50-50 p50-65 Thymocytes we ' ' r p50-RelB cocultured with TEC f < 4-ps0-50 .
# ® t for 70 hours 4 ns 1 FIG .
2 .
Interaction of thymocytes with TEC leads to a permanent induction of NF- « B complexes in thymocytes .
( A ) Protein extracts were obtained from a frozen and crushed piece of thymus ( lanes 1 and 2 ) or from thymocytes freshly isolated ( lanes 3 and 4 ) , cultured for 30 h ( lane 5 ) to 70 h ( lane 6 ) , or cocultured with TEC for 30 h ( lane 7 ) or 70 h ( lane 8 ) .
These extracts were incubated with a `` P-labeled oligonucleotide representing the HIV LTR-derived « B motif .
Competition ( comp , lanes 1 and 3 ) with a 40-fold molar excess of unlabeled oligonucleotide was used to confirm the specificity of the DNA binding activity detected .
`` NF-xB `` refers to several NF- « B complexes , which are further analyzed in panel B .
This experiment is representative of 3 independent experiments carried out with autologous TEC on three thymuses and 10 independent experiments carried out with heterologous TEC .
( B ) Identification by immunoreac-tivity of the distinct NF-kB complexes present in the thymocytes .
Protein extracts were obtained either from a frozen and crushed piece of thymus or from whole-cell extracts of freshly isolated thymocytes or of thymocytes cultured for 70 h in the presence of TEC .
These extracts were preincubated with preimmune serum ( preI ) or with antisera raised against distinct subunits of NF- « B complexes : p50 , p52 , p65 , c-Rel , or RelB ( as indicated above the lanes ) before incubation with the labeled probe .
The composition of the complexes is indicated on the right .
This experiment is representative of three independent experiments , each carried out on a different thymus .
n.s 1 refers to a nonspecific binding activity since it was not competed by an excess of nonradiolabeled xB probe .
to physiological interactions between thymocytes and TEC .
These results demonstrate that coculture with TEC induces a sustained NF-KB activation in thymocytes .
We then characterized the NF- « xB complexes which bind to the HIV enhancer element by using antibodies against each subunit of the NF-kB family ( p50 , p52 , p65 , RelB , and c-Rel ) .
As shown in Fig .
2B , in the whole-thymus extract , an antibody against the p50 subunit abolished the binding of most of the complexes observed , an antibody against p65 abolished the very faint band corresponding to the upper complex , and an antibody against ReIB abolished the binding of the upper and intermediate complexes .
The antibody against c-Rel did not significantly modify the binding of any of these complexes .
voL .
73 , 1999 48h - Time of preculture of thymocytes wn mn umm Ja | i Coculture with TEC A 0 B me tn 1 Normalized luciferase activity 2 T H H 0 cotransfected LTR-uce plasmids : _ O- cmvre -- A EF1-figal FIG .
3 .
The presence of NF-kB binding activity in thymocytes correlates with the level of HIV-LTR activity .
NF- « B activity was determined as described in the legend to Fig .
2 in whole-cell extracts from freshly isolated thymocytes or thymocytes cultured alone for 24 or 48 h or cocultured with TEC for 48 h. In parallel , freshly isolated thymocytes or thymocytes precultured for 24 and 48 h alone or with TEC were cotransfected by electroporation with the constructs LTR-luc , CMV-Tat , EF1-Bgal ( respectively used at 10 , 2.5 , and 10 pg per 10 `` cells ) .
The transfected thymocytes were then returned to the previous culture conditions for 20 h. Luciferase and B-galactosidase activities were determined 20 h after transfection in the thymocyte lysates .
LTR activity was expressed as normalized luciferase activity corresponding to the ratio of luciferase to B-galactosidase activity per 10° cells .
This experiment is representative of four independent experiments , each carried out on a different thymus .
These data suggest that the lowest complex is p50-p50 , the intermediate and major complex is p50-RelB , and the upper complex probably contains p50 , p52 ( as a minor component ) , and p65 .
As also shown in Fig .
2B , in freshly isolated thymocytes p50-p65 was the prevalent complex , and coculture with TEC maintained this complex and to a lesser extent the p50-RelB one .
The presence of NF-KB binding activity in freshly isolated thymocytes or in thymocytes cultured with TEC is responsible for a high HIV-1 LTR activity .
We then determined whether the sustained NF- « B activity observed in thymocytes , either freshly isolated or cocultured with TEC , correlated with the level of LTR activity in thymocytes .
For this purpose , we de-termined , in parallel experiments , NF- « B DNA binding activity and the level of luciferase activity of the LTR-lue construct transfected in thymocytes .
A CMV -tat construct was cotransfected with LTR-luc since expression of the powerful viral transactivator Tat emphasizes the magnitude of NF- « xB-depen-dent transactivation of the LTR ( 15 ) .
EF1-Bgal plasmid containing the reporter gene B-galactosidase under the control of the basal promoter of the elongation factor EFla was also cotransfected to normalize the transfection efficiencies .
Thymocytes were cultured alone or cocultured with TEC for 48 h prior to cotransfection by electroporation with LTR-luc , CMV -tat , and EF1-Bgal .
The thymocytes were collected from the culture dishes ( then containing a 48-h conditioned me-dium ) for the time of electroporation and were then returned to this conditioned medium for an additional 20 h. LTR activity , expressed as normalized luciferase activity , was then deter-mined .
As shown in Fig .
3 , LTR activity correlated with the NF- « B-DEPENDENT HIV-1 REPLICATION IN THYMUS - 2067 level of NF-kB binding activity .
LTR activity was high in freshly isolated thymocytes and progressively decreased ( for 24 or 48 h ) when these cells were cultured alone , whereas it was maintained at a high level in those cocultivated with TEC ( for 48 h ) .
However , whereas NF-KB binding activity was higher in freshly isolated thymocytes than in thymocytes cocultivated with TEC , LTR activity was comparable in the two cell systems .
This can be explained by the fact that NF-xB activity was determined just after thymocyte isolation whereas the luciferase assay was performed 20 h after transfection .
This interval is sufficient to allow a significant decrease of NF- « B binding activity in freshly isolated thymocytes cultured in the absence of TEC .
We then confirmed that the xB sites were required for the high transcriptional activity of the LTR in freshly isolated thymocytes or in thymocytes in coculture with TEC .
As shown in Fig .
4A , the activity of an LTR-A « B mutated in the two kB sites was 5- to 10-fold lower than that observed with the wild-type LTR construct .
The role of the « B-responsive element was further confirmed by comparing the luciferase activity obtained with the 3Enh-TK-luc construct to that obtained with the control vector TK-luc ( Fig .
4B ) .
In this case , a 10- to 15-fold difference was observed between the two constructs .
In addition , we formally demonstrated that NF-kB was specifically responsible for transactivation of the HIV-1 LTR by cotransfecting freshly isolated thymocytes with LTR-luc , CMV-tat , and an expression vector encoding the IxBa inhibitory protein mutated on serines 32 and 36 ( IxBa « -DN ) ( 63 ) .
These mutations prevent phosphorylation and subsequent degradation of IxBa .
IxBa-DN behaves as a specific and constitutive inhibitor of NF-kB activity .
As a control , we replaced IxBa-DN by the vector RecCMV .
Indeed , cotransfection of increasing amounts of this mutant progressively reduced the transcriptional activity of LTR to a value comparable to that obtained with the LTR-AkB in freshly isolated thymocytes ( Fig .
4C ) as well as in thymocytes cocultured with TEC ( data not shown ) .
As expected , IxBa-DN did not modify the transcriptional activity of the LTR-AkB promoter ( Fig .
4D ) , confirming against that it specifically targets NF-kB on the wild-type LTR .
Taken together , these experiments provide evidence of a permanent induction of activity leading to a permanent LTR transactivation in freshly isolated thymocytes or in thymocytes cocultured with TEC .
NF-B activation induced by the interaction of thymocytes with TEC is mediated mainly by TNF and to a lesser extent by IL-1 , but NF-B inducibility requires IL-7 .
TNF and IL-1 are well-known triggers of NF-KB activation ( 10 , 26 , 44 ) .
We have recently shown that the strong activation of HIV replication in thymocytes , elicited by their interaction with TEC , is mediated mainly by soluble factors including IL-1 , TNF , IL-6 , and GM-CSF ( 48 ) .
Therefore , we first evaluated whether these cytokines , particularly IL-1 and TNF , were involved in the permanent induction of NF-kB observed in thymocytes cocultured with TEC .
For this purpose , we performed cocultures in transwell chambers to prevent cell-to-cell contact but to allow the exchange of soluble factors .
At the start of the coculture , neutralizing antibodies against IL-1 and TNF were added to test their ability to block NF-kB activation .
An antagonist of the IL-1 receptor ( IL-1ra ) was also used .
A neutralizing antibody against IL-6 was used as a negative control , since IL-6 is not an inducer .
As shown in Fig .
5 ( lane 4 ) , NF-kB activation was sustained by the coculture even in the absence of cell-to-cell contact , indicating that soluble factors were mainly involved .
As expected , antibody against IL-6 did not reduce NF-kB 2068 CHENE ET AL .
A B r 3 1547 304 10 4 204 107 Normalized luciferase activity Normalized luciferase activity Lie 0 7 LTR-lue - LTRAxB-lue 3Enh-TK-lue - TK-luc CMV -tat CMV-tat EF1-fgal _ EF1-fgal EFL-Bgal J. Virou .
C D 257 [ 3 E Z .
> g 204 ‘ g 20 = 9 t ¥ w § is- § _ is & Us € S2 2 34 `` a 105 `` I 16 .
`` G c 3 % 3 % ol = Z 2 a - 0 LTR-luc ( ng ) _ 6 6 6 LTRAxB-luc ( ug ) 6 6 IxBo-DN ( g ) - 0 6 12 IxBo-DN ( ug ) 0 12 EF1-fgal 6 6 6 EF1-figal 6 6 CMV-tat ( ug ) _ 2 2 2 CMV -tat ( ug ) 2 2 ReCMVing ) - 12 6 0 ReCMV ( ug ) 12 0 FIG .
4 .
NF- « B activity is responsible for the high transcriptional activity of the LTR in thymocytes freshly isolated or cocultured with TEC .
Freshly isolated thymocytes were cotransfected by electroporation with the following constructs : LTRIuc , CMV-tat , and EF1-fBgal ( respectively used at 10 , 5 , and 10 pg per 10 `` cells ) or LTR-A « B-lue , CMV-tat , and EF1-Bgal ( used at 10 , 5 , and 10 pg per 10 `` cells ) ( A ) ; 3Enh-TK-lue and EF1-fgal ( each used at 10pg per 10 `` cells ) or TK-lue and EF1-Bgal ( used at 10 and 10 pg per 10 `` cells ) ( B ) ; LTRluc , CMV-tat , and EF1-Bgal ( used at 6 , 2 , and 6 ug per 10 `` cells ) and increasing amounts of I « Ba-DN expression vector as indicated ( C ) ; and LTR-A « B-luc , CMV-tat , and EF1-Bgal ( used at 6 , 2 , and 6 ug per 10 `` cells ) and 12 pg of IxB « -DN expression vector as indicated ( D ) .
Re-CMV was added , as indicated , to normalize the amount of transfected DNA .
Luciferase and B-galactosidase activities were determined 20 h after transfection in the thymocyte lysates .
LTR activity was expressed as normalized luciferase activity .
This experiment is representative of three independent experiments , each carried out on a different thymus .
activation ( lane 6 ) .
The effects of IL-1ra or antibody against IL-18 were very modest ( lanes 7 and 8 ) .
In contrast , anti-TNF almost completely abolished NF- « B activity in thymocytes ( lane 5 ) .
The fact that the extent of inhibition was about the same with anti-TNF as with the combination of anti-TNF , IL-1ra , and anti-IL-6 in the presence or absence of cell-to-cell contact ( lanes 9 and 11 ) strongly suggests that TNF is the major inducer of NF-kB activation within the coculture .
We then tested whether TNF or IL-1B was sufficient to induce NF-kB binding activity in thymocytes cultured alone .
As shown in Fig .
6 , IL-1B had a weak stimulating effect on NF-kB activity in thymocytes ( lane 4 ) , in contrast to TNF , which was able by itself to sustain a high NF- « B binding activity in thymocytes cultured for 30 h ( lane 3 ) .
However , the level of NF-kB activity obtained with TNF was lower than that observed in freshly isolated thymocytes ( compare lane 3 to lane 1 ) .
In addition , TNF was not efficient in maintaining long-term ( for instance , 60-h ) NF- « B activity ( lane 6 ) .
This suggested that other factors within the microenvironment might be required to maintain NF- « B activity in thymocytes .
This hypothesis was confirmed by the fact that TEC CM , when supplemented with TNF , was able to maintain NF- « B activity for 60 h ( lane 9 ) whereas TEC CM alone had no effect ( lane 8 ) .
We conclude that TNF is mainly required to maintain NF- « B activity in thymocytes but that its effect requires another factor ( s ) secreted by TEC .
We tested the possibility that IL-7 , a cytokine expressed by TEC which plays a crucial role in T-cell development ( 41 , 43 , 45 , 49 ) , was this cofactor .
We first showed that TEC CM obtained after 3 days contains between 5 and 10 pg of IL-7/ml per 10° cells .
We then demonstrated ( Fig .
6B ) that the costimulatory effect of the TEC CM was abrogated when this medium was depleted of IL-7 by using an antibody against IL-7 ( lane 5 ) .
In parallel , TEC failed to sustain this activity when thymocytes were preincubated with an antibody against the specific « chain of the IL-7 receptor before coculture .
The role of IL-7 was also confirmed by the fact that IL-7 elicited a strong costimulatory effect with TNF and to a lesser extent with IL-1 ( Fig .
6C , lanes 6 and 7 ) whereas IL-6 and GM-CSF , which are secreted by TEC ( 34 ) and involved in HIV replication , did not modify the NF- « B binding activity induced by IL-1 or TNF ( lane 4 ) .
activation was also observed when thymocytes were treated with IL-7 alone ( Fig .
6C , lane 5 , and Fig .
6D , lane 2 ) .
However , antibodies against TNF and IL-1 , added simultaneously with IL-7 at the start of the culture ( Fig .
6D , lane 3 ) , prevented this induction , again indicating that IL-7 plays the role of a cofactor which amplifies the effect of low levels of TNF ( and IL-1 ) secreted by thymocytes .
Together , these data argue for a major role of TNF in maintaining NF-kB activation in thymocytes , but this activation requires IL-7 , which is secreted mainly by TEC .
We then determined whether HIV LTR transactivation in thymocytes was also dependent upon the stimulation by these cytokines .
To emphasize the transactivation , we used a combination of IL-1 and TNF ( termed IL-1-TNF ) , since their pathways of NF-kB activation are known to be synergistic ( 44 ) .
Other combinations of cytokines were also used , as shown in Fig .
7 .
Thymocytes were maintained in culture either unstimulated or treated with the various cytokines for 48 h prior to transfection .
Cotransfection was then performed with CMV EF1-Bgal , and either LTR-luc or LTRAxB-lue .
The transfected thymocytes were then returned for an additional 20 h to the previous conditioned medium prior to the determination of reporter gene activities .
The activities of the two LTRs , wild type and AB , were of the same level in nonactivated Jurkat cells ( data not shown ) whereas the activity of the wild-type LTR was 3.5-fold higher than that of LTRAxB in thymocytes voL .
73 , 1999 “ 2m Thymocytes cultured for 45 hours Coculture with TEC -o = - +o o + + + + + + Contact -o - - 40k e k e - +0 + & & g. 4 « < é £ é - 58 m 2 { Po OH E : fcik f £ $ 8 os ( 3 ‘ s .
soc g 8 8 4 < 3§ Cl r- affudl -- -= - > < p n.s 1 H P3 n.s 2 je > | mal [ as wa » w* - m 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 FIG .
5 .
TNF and , to a lesser extent , IL-1 are involved in the permanently induced NF-kB activity present in thymocytes during the coculture with TEC .
Thymocytes were freshly isolated ( lanes 1 and 2 ) or cultured for 45 h ( lanes 3 to 11 ) either alone ( lane 3 [ Control thymocytes ] ) or in the presence of TEC under conditions avoiding contact ( lanes 4 to 9 ) or allowing contact ( lanes 10 and 11 ) .
During the coculture , the cells were either left untreated ( lane 4 [ Control coculture , 45 hours ] and lane 10 [ Control coculture ] ) or were treated at the start of the coculture with antibodies respectively raised against TNF ( lane 5 ) , IL-6 ( lane 6 ) , and IL-1B ( lane 8 ) , with the antagonist of the IL-1 receptor ( lane 7 ) , or with eTNF plus IL-1 ra plus IL-6 ( lanes 9 and 11 ) .
Whole-cell extracts from these various samples were incubated with a *°P-labeled oligonucleotide representing the HIV LTR-derived « B motif .
Competition ( comp [ lane 1 ] ) with a 40-fold molar excess of unlabeled oligonucleotide was used to confirm the specificity of the DNA-binding activity detected .
NF-B activity is indicated .
The positions of two nonspecific ( n.s 1 and n.s 2 ) binding activities are indicated .
The positions of two nonspecific ( n.s 1 and n.s 2 ) binding activities are indicated .
This experiment is representative of three independent experiments , each carried out on a different thymus .
( considered the basal activity of the LTR , independent of NF-kB activation ) ( Fig .
7A ) .
These data confirmed that thymocytes left unstimulated even for 48 h were not completely devoid of NF-kB activity ( see also the LTR and NF-kB activity [ Fig .
3 ] ) .
IL-1-TNF stimulation further enhanced this level ( ninefold ) .
The transactivation level observed with IL-1-TNF was not further modified by addition of IL-6 and GM-CSF .
Only addition of IL-7 to IL-1-TNF led to a dramatic increase in LTR transactivation ( 30-fold ) .
However , it should be noted that IL-7 alone also increased HIV-1 LTR activity ( 24-fold ) .
This is in agreement with the significant NF-kB activity elicited by IL-7 acting as a cofactor of low levels of TNF ( and IL-1 ) constitutively produced by thymocytes ( Fig .
6C , lanes 5 through 7 ) .
As expected , the effect of TNF-IL-1 required xB sites , since the LTRAxB was unresponsive .
In contrast , IL-7 triggered LTRAxB transactivation , although less efficiently than that of the wild-type LTR , indicating that this cytokine acts through both NF-kB-dependent and NF- « B-independent pathways .
In Fig .
7B we show that the transactivation induced by IL-7 correlates with the weak induction of transcriptional activity of LTRAxB in thymocytes during their interaction with TEC and suggests that secretion of IL-7 by TEC is mainly responsible for this effect .
However , the induc- NF- « B-DEPENDENT HIV-1 REPLICATION IN THYMUS - 2069 tion of the transcriptional activity of the wild-type LTR by TEC is much more efficient than that of the LTRAxB .
DISCUSSION We report here that NF- « B activation is a major prerequisite for a high level of HIV-1 replication in thymocytes and that the interaction of infected thymocytes with TEC is necessary for such an induction .
This conclusion was drawn from the fact that an HIV-1 provirus with its kB sites deleted failed to replicate in thymocytes whereas the wild-type provirus exhibited a high level of replication , although only in the presence of TEC .
The active HIV replication observed within the thymus ( 58-60 ) thus suggested that NF- « B was permanently induced in the thymic microenvironment .
We confirmed that a high level of NF-kB binding activity was present within this organ , taken as a whole .
This is in agreement with the detection of nuclear NF- « kB complexes in vivo in human thymus by in situ immunostaining ( 11 ) .
We also detected NF- « B binding activity in freshly isolated thymocytes , as assessed by the presence of distinct NF-kB complexes .
p50-p65 was the prevalent complex , but p50-p50 and p50-RelIB were also present .
p52-containing complexes , although minor , were also detected .
The difference between whole thymus and thymocytes suggests that the major RelB complexes detected in whole thymus were mainly derived from TEC , confirming previous reports of results obtained with murine thymus ( 7 , 37 , 62 ) .
We then showed that NF-kB activity observed in freshly isolated thymocytes was the result of specific signals delivered within the microenvironment .
This activity , which is mainly due to p50-p65 complexes , decreased when thymocytes were cultured alone .
Furthermore , we demonstrated that at least part of the activation signals comes from the interaction with TEC , since addition of TEC to thymocyte culture prevented this progressive loss of activation .
The same effect was observed with autologous and heterologous TEC , excluding the potential involvement of a mixed lymphocyte reaction .
However , compared to that observed in freshly isolated thymocytes , the maintenance of NF-kB activity during coculture with TEC was less efficient , but the nature and ratio of the complexes were similar .
Therefore , we could not exclude the possible role of other cells or factors within the microenvironment in strengthening NF-kB activity .
We can also argue that disruption of thymocyte-TEC interaction during thymus preparation might not be immediately and efficiently restored by mixing these two cell subpopulations in the same culture dish , particularly with regard to the necessary accumulation of soluble factors .
The high level of active NF- « xB complexes , including p50-p65 , in freshly isolated thymocytes as well as in thymocytes cocultured with TEC was postulated to correlate with a strong activation of the HIV LTR .
By using transfection assays , we showed that the decrease of NF-kB activity in thymocytes in culture was accompanied by a decrease of LTR activity , except in the presence of TEC , which maintained a high level of both NF-kB and LTR activity .
We also confirmed that this high activity of the LTR was dependent upon kB binding sites since it was strongly decreased by deletion of these sites ( LTRAxB-luc ) .
The involvement of the xB responsive element was further confirmed by comparing the luciferase activity obtained with the 3Enh-TK-luc construct with that obtained with the control vector TK-luc .
It should be noted that the migration of the activity indicated as n.s 1 in Fig .
5 , observed in EMSA , was not significantly modified by competition with an excess of the unlabeled probe .
In consequence , this activity was indicated as nonspecific .
However , it was shown to be modulated by certain cytokines of 2070 CHENE ET AL .
J. VirRou .
A Freshly isolated _ Thymocytes Thymocytes B thymocytes _ cultured 30 hours cultured 60 hours Thymocytes Thymocytes cultured 45 hours cocultured 45 hours with TEC -a z z 2 E C C & f $ s to fs % got fois © - = E 5 5 Eo 80 0 $ bs §§ p 3 8 s `` 3 f bo : g g 3 ?
5 q 2 B f gf -is 8 « im=NF- < B .
.
« m= ¥ _| « « f=n.s 1 1 20 3 4 5 60 7 8s 9 1 20 3 40 5 600 7 8 Thymocytes Thymocytes C cultured 45 hours D cultured 45 hours 8 P ﬁg & a E c 2 + 2 £ B a £ & a .
7 6 ro + a +T 8 & m ag o t tot 50 t 11:3 8 # 8 B1 .
0 # # @ 8° # # + .
NF-xB g ] fl ns 1 « =n .
1 1 20 3 4 5° 60 7 1 2 3 FIG .
6 .
TNF and , to a lesser extent , IL-1 induce NF-B activity in thymocytes , and IL-7 is required for this effect .
Whole-cell extracts were prepared from freshly isolated thymocytes ( panel A , lane 1 ) or from thymocytes cultivated for 30 , 60 , or 45 h. ( A ) During the indicated culture times , thymocytes were either left untreated ( lane 1 , control for freshly isolated ; lane 2 , control 30 h ; and lane 5 , control 60 h ) or were stimulated with either TNF ( lanes 3 and 6 ) , IL-1B ( lanes 4 and 7 ) , or TNF in the presence of TEC CM ( TEC CM + TNF ) ( lane 9 ) .
TEC conditioned medium was also added alone ( lane 8 [ TEC CMJ ) .
The data shown here are representative of three independent experiments carried out on three thymuses .
( B ) Thymocytes were cultured for 45 h either untreated ( lane 1 , control 45 h ) , with TNF ( lane 2 ) , with TEC CM ( lane 3 ) , or with TNF in the presence of TEC CM ( TEC CM + TNF ) preincubated ( lane 5 ) or not ( lane 4 ) with antibody against IL-7 .
In lanes 6 to 8 , the thymocytes were left untreated for 6 h ( lane 6 ) or incubated with an antibody against IL-7Ra ( lane 7 ) or with an IgG1 control serum ( lane 8 ) before being cocultured with TEC for 45 h. The data shown here are representative of two independent experiments carried out on two thymuses .
( C ) Cells were left untreated for the 45 h of the culture ( lane 1 , control 45 h ) or treated with IL-1B ( lane 2 ) , TNF ( lane 3 ) , IL-1B plus TNF plus IL-6 plus GM-CSF ( lane 4 ) , IL-7 ( lane 5 ) , IL-7 plus IL-18 ( lane 6 ) , or IL-7 plus TNF ( lane 7 ) .
This experiment is representative of three independent experiments carried out on three thymuses .
( D ) Thymocytes were left untreated ( lane 1 , control ) or stimulated with IL-7 ( lane 2 ) or IL-7 in presence of anti-TNF and II-1ra ( lane 3 ) .
Whole-cell extracts were incubated with a P-labeled oligonucleotide representing xB motif .
NF-kB activity is indicated .
This experiment is representative of two independent experiments , each carried out on a different thymus .
the coculture ( Fig .
5 and 6 ) .
This activity is likely to be KBF2/ not exclude a role of the contact in sustaining the levels of RBP , which has been shown to bind kB sites ( 25 ) , albeit with these cytokines .
We showed that TNF , secreted mainly by an affinity much lower than that of NF-kB ( 252 ) .
thymocytes , represented a major requirement for NF- « B acti- Since certain nucleotides of the xB element within the LTR vation , since antibodies against TNF abrogated the inductive were found to participate in the binding of other transcription effect of the coculture .
IL-1 , produced by both TEC and thy-factors such as RBP/KBF2 ( 25 ) , NF-AT ( 29 ) , ets ( 53 ) , and _ mocytes ( 41 , 66 ) , modestly participated in this induction .
Un-GABP ( 13 ) , it was necessary to formally demonstrate that LTR expectedly , these two cytokines were not sufficient to maintain transactivation was regulated by members of the Rel/NF- « B a long-term activation of NF- « B in culture .
We then demon-family .
We therefore cotransfected a mutated IxBa molecule strated that IL-7 , secreted mainly by TEC ( 42 , 49 ) , induced an which can not be phosphorylated and degraded ( 63 ) together NF-kB activity in thymocytes by acting as a cofactor of low with an HIV LTR .
Overexpression of this mutated form of levels of TNF and IL-1 constitutively produced by thymocytes IxBa , acting in competition with endogenous IxBa , led to a ( 12 , 16 , 66 ) .
This was confirmed by the fact that the IL-7-dose-dependent decrease in LTR activity .
The highest concen- induced NF-kB activity could be abolished by antibodies tration of IxBa « -DN decreased the activity of the wild-type against IL-1 and TNF .
Together , these data lead to the con-LTR to a value comparable to that obtained with the LTR- clusion that TNF is the major inducer of NF-kB activity in AxB .
These data confirm that enhanced transactivation of the thymocytes and that IL-1 has a modest synergistic effect .
IL-7 LTR is triggered by the ReI/NF- « B family and that NF- « B is required for the maintenance of this activity , acting as an activity in thymocytes is not constitutive but results from a important cofactor .
It is at first sight surprising that in our permanent activation of NF-kB .
previous study ( 48 ) , thymocytes were capable of replicating the The major role of soluble factors in NF-kB activation was virus in vitro in the absence of IL-7 addition ( in the presence first demonstrated by the fact that thymocyte-TEC interaction of TNF , IL-1 , GM-CSF , and IL-6 ) .
The possible explanation is was efficient even in absence of cell-to-cell contact .
This does that IL-7 was expressed at low levels in the thymocyte culture .
voL .
73 , 1999 A NF- « B-DEPENDENT HIV-1 REPLICATION IN THYMUS B 2071 + + + - Thymocytes 50 4 Coculture > Bo sq C + ~ _+ wih TEC « m > é 40 - 33 31,0 J [ s 3 e A 3 304 = \ E 3 is- § jaw `` 3 B- G 104 E .
\ 5 3 9,0 \ Z 104 5 » § \ \ \ es o .
By 7 , | $ s SS & Sy 30 R i . }
E € 0 RB i .
3 5 E ci-le E 5 E 78 *~ E cotransfected _ LITBRve LTRAxB-lue e E € 3 6 f $ $ 3 plasmids : _ CMV : Tat _ CMV-Tat - - a -- 4G 7 * EF1-Bgal EF1-Bgal a + & a + é = = = C L Lp d | LTR-lue LTRAxB-lue `` - CMV-Tat CMV-Tat P ' EF1-Bgal EFL-Bgal FIG .
7 .
( A ) LTR transactivation in thymocytes is triggered by TNF and IL-1 in the presence of IL-7 .
Freshly isolated thymocytes were precultured for 48 h alone or with a combination of cytokines as indicated prior to cotransfection with either LTR-lue , CMV-tat , and EF1-Bgal or LTRAB-luc , CMV-tat , and EF1-Bgal .
The plasmids were transfected by electroporation at the respective amounts of 10 , 2.5 , and 10 ug per 10 `` cells .
The transfected thymocytes were then returned for an additional 20 h under the previous culture conditions prior to determination of luciferase and B-galactosidase activities .
LTR activity was expressed as normalized luciferase activity .
Numbers at the top of the columns represent fold amplification relative to luciferase expression in unstimulated thymocytes transfected with LTRAxB-luc ( level of NF-xB-independent activity ) .
This experiment is representative of three independent experiments carried out on three thymuses .
( B ) Interaction of thymocytes with TEC also induces an NF- « B independent LTR transactivation in thymocytes .
Freshly isolated thymocytes were precultured for 48 h alone or in the presence of TEC prior to cotransfection with either LTR-lue , CMV-tat , and EF1-Bgal or LTRAxB-luc , CMV-tat , and EF1-Bgal as described in the legend to panel A .
This experiment is representative of four independent experiments , cach carried out on a different thymus .
IL-7 might be provided either by the thymocytes themselves , which express at least detectable IL-7 mRNA ( 41 , 66 ) , or by stromal cells ( 42 , 49 ) , which might remain at a low level in the thymocyte preparation , although the purity of the thymocyte population was estimated to be 99 % .
This low level of IL-7 might then be sufficient to permit NF- « B activity in the presence of saturating concentrations of TNF and IL-1 added to the thymocyte culture medium .
This hypothesis is in agreement with the fact that HIV-1 replication in thymocytes cultured with IL-1 , IL-6 , TNF , and GM-CSF or cocultured with TEC was delayed when an anti-human IL-7 antiserum was added at the start of the culture ( data not shown ) .
Nevertheless , the level of replication obtained in thymocytes in vitro when IL-7 was used with TNF , IL-1 , GM-CSF , and IL-6 was much higher than in absence of IL-7 ( data not shown ) .
This is in agreement with the transfection experiments performed on thymocytes after 48 h in culture , showing that the addition of IL-7 to IL-1-TNF led to a dramatic increase in LTR transactivation .
Several hypotheses might be proposed to explain the role of IL-7 in the NF-kB-dependent pathway .
IL-7 increases the activity of the AP1 transcription factor ( 17 ) , which is able to physically interact and synergize with NF-kB ( 55 ) .
The increase in AP1 activity could also directly upregu-late the expression of the TNF receptor p75 , since an API1-responsive element is present in the 5 ' regulatory region of its gene ( 51 ) .
This last hypothesis is difficult to demonstrate by using the total freshly isolated thymocyte population , in which the number of thymocytes expressing this receptor never exceeded 3 % by cytofluorometric analysis ( data not shown ) .
Indeed , IL-7 receptor is restricted to certain subsets of thymocytes ( 57 ) .
Work to identify the subpopulations of thymocytes responsible for the high level of HIV replication is in progress in our laboratory .
Use of these subpopulations , which might be characterized by the expression of both IL-7 and TNF receptors ( and to a lesser extent IL-1 receptor ) , will allow us to determine whether IL-7 modulates the expression of the TNF p75 receptor .
Interestingly , IL-7 also increases the activity of the LTRAkB construct , suggesting that this cytokine is also involved in an NF- « B-independent pathway .
In addition to AP1 , IL-7 activates several other transcription factors including NF-AT ( 17 ) , Stat 3 , and Stat 5 ( 36 , 38 ) .
By systematic mutagenesis within the LTR , we are in the process of identifying the sequence responsible for this effect .
The magnitude of transactivation through this pathway is much lower than that observed through the NF- « B one .
This is very possibly the reason why no virus replication was detectable in the absence of xB sites .
Together , these data suggest that NF-xB activity is not strictly necessary to induce LTR transactivation but is necessary to attain a high level of HIV replication .
Similar conclusions have been 2072 CHENE ET AL .
reached concerning the involvement of NF- « B in HIV replication in T lymphocytes ( 8 ) .
It is worth noting that the regulation of NF- « B-dependent transactivation of the LTR is highly dependent on the NF-kB complexes present in a given cell and in its microenvironment .
For instance , in peripheral resting T lymphocytes , an inactive p50 homodimer constitutively occupies the kB sites , preventing LTR activation by p50-p65 induced by TNF or IL-1 .
The major stimulus responsible for an NF- « B-dependent transactivation is the recognition of a specific antigen ( 19 ) permitting an induction of Bel-3 , a coactivator ( 14 ) which generates , with p50 homodimers , an active trimer on the HIV-LTR ( unpublished data ) .
In contrast , in thymocytes p50 homodimers are underrepresented with respect to p50-p65 heterodimers , which are permanently activated by TNF and IL-1 within the thymic microenvironment .
Under these conditions , TNF and IL-1 induce LTR transactivation .
Another specificity of the thymocytes and the thymic microenvironment is that these cytokines can not efficiently function without IL-7 .
Together with our previous report , we demonstrate here that to sustain efficient HIV replication , thymocytes require cytokines responsible for their activation through NF-kB ( TNF and IL-1 ) and for their survival ( GM-CSF ) ( 27 , 30 ) , as well as a cytokine which seems to fulfill both functions ( IL-7 ) ( 1 , 23 ) .
Through these cytokines , the thymus behaves as a virus reservoir , since it favors the maintenance of a high viral load in certain subpopulations of thymocytes ( 8a ) , as well as a prolonged life span of these thymocytes .
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Sonia Berrih-Aknin and Claude Planché ( hospital Marie Lannelongue , Le Plessis-Robinson , France ) for providing us with thymuses from infants undergoing cardiac surgery .
We thank A. Israél for providing us with antibodies against NF-kB subunits and for a review of the manuscript .
We thank N. Rice for providing us with IxBa-DN expression vector , and we thank S. Mémet for the EFla-fBgal vector .
This work was supported by the Agence Nationale pour la Recher-che sur le SIDA ( ANRS ) .
L. Chéne is a fellow of the French Ministry of Education and Research ( MENESR ) .
REFERENCES 1 .
Akashi , K. , M. Kondo , U. von Freeden , U. Jeffry , R. Murray , and I L. Weissman .
1997 .
Bcl-2 rescues T lymphopoiesis in interleukin-7 receptor-deficient mice .
Cell 89:1033-1041 .
2 .
Autran , B. , P. Guiet , M. Raphael , M. Grandadam , H. Agut , D. Candotti , P. Grenot , F. Puech , P. Debré , and J.-Y .
Cesbron .
1996 .
Thymocytes and thymic microenvironment alterations during a systemic HIV infection in a severe combined immunodeficient mouse model .
AIDS 10:717-727 .
3 .
Bach , M. K. , and J. R. Brashler .
1995 .
Evidence that granulocyte/macro-phage-colony-stimulating factor and interferon-gamma maintain the viability of human peripheral blood monocytes in part by their suppression of IL-10 production .
Int .
Arch .
Allergy Immunol .
107:90-92 .
4 .
Bachelerie , F. , M. S. Rodriguez , C. Dargemont , D. Rousset , D. Thomas , J. L. Virelizier , and F. Arenzana-Seisdedos .
1997 .
Nuclear export signal of IxBa interferes with the Rev-dependent posttranscriptional regulation of human immunodeficiency virus type I. J .
Cell Sci .
110:2883-2893 .
5 .
Baldwin , A. S. 1996 .
The NF-kappa B and I kappa B proteins : new discoveries and insights .
Annu .
Rev .
Immunol .
14:649-683 .
6 .
Braun , J. , H. Valentin , M. 'T .
Nugeyre , H. Ohayon , P. Gounon , and S. F. Barré-Sinoussi .
1996 .
Productive and persistent infection of human thymic epithelial cells in vitro with HIV-1 .
Virology 225:413-418 .
7 .
Burkly , L. , C. Hession , L. Ogata , C. Reilly , L. A. Marconi , D. Olson , R. Tizard , R. Cate , and D. Lo .
1995 .
Expression of relB is required for the development of thymic medulla and dendritic cells .
Nature 373:531-536 .
8 .
Chen , B. K. , M. B. Feinberg , and D. Baltimore .
1997 .
The « B sites in the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 long terminal repeat enhance virus replication yet are not absolutely required for viral growth .
J. Virol .
71:5495-5504 .
8a.Chéne , L. , et al .
Unpublished data .
9 .
Coffin , J. M. 1995 .
HIV population dynamics in vivo : implications for genetic variation , pathogenesis , and therapy .
Science 267:483-489 .
10 .
Dub , E. J. , W. J. Maury , T. M. Folks , A. S. Fauci , and A .
B. Rabson .
1989 .
Tumor necrosis factor « activates human immunodeficiency virus type 1 through induction of nuclear factor binding to the NF- « B sites in the long J. Virou .
terminal repeat .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 86:5974-5978 .
11 .
Feuillard , J. , C. Dargemont , V. Ferreira , N. Tarantino , P. Debre , M. Raphael , and M. Korner .
1997 .
Nuclear Rel-A and c-Rel protein complexes are differentially distributed within human thymocytes .
J. Immunol .
158:2585-2591 .
12 .
Fisher , M. , I. MacNeil , T. Suda , J. Cupp , K. Shortman , and A. Zlotnik .
1991 .
Cytokines production by mature and immature thymocytes .
J. Immunol .
146:3452-3456 .
13 .
Flory , E. , A. Hoffmeyer , U. Smola , U. R. Rapp , and J. T. Bruder .
1996 .
Raf-1 kinase targets GA-binding protein in transcriptional regulation of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 promoter .
J. Virol .
70:2260-2268 .
14 .
Fujita , T. , G. P. Nolan , H. C. Liou , M. L. Scott , and D. Baltimore .
1993 .
The candidate proto oncogene Bel-3 encodes a transcriptional coactivator that activates through NF-kappa B p50 homodimers .
Genes Dev .
7:1354-1363 .
15 .
Gaynor , R. B .
1995 .
Regulation of HIV-1 gene expression by the transactivator protein Tat .
Curr .
Top .
Microbiol .
Immunol .
193:51-77 .
16 .
Giroir , B. P. , T. Brown , and B. Beutler .
1992 .
Constitutive synthesis of tumor necrosis factor in the thymus .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 89:4864-4868 .
17 .
Gringhuis , S. L , L. Deleij , E. W. Verschuren , P. Borger , and E. Vellenga .
1997 .
Interleukin-7 upregulates the interleukin-2-gene expression in activated human T lymphocytes at the transcriptional level by enhancing the DNA binding activities of both nuclear factor of activated T cells and acti-vator protein-1 .
Blood 90:2690-2700 .
18 .
Harrich , D. , J. Garcia , R. Mitsuyasu , and R. Gaynor .
1990 .
TAR independent activation of the human immunodeficiency virus in phorbol ester stimulated T lymphocytes .
EMBO J .
9:4417-4423 .
19 .
Hazan , U. , D. Thomas , J. Alcami , F. Bachelerie , N. Israél , H. Yssel , J.-L. Virelizier , and F. Arenzana-Seisdedos .
1990 .
Stimulation of a human T-cell clone with anti-CD3 or tumor necrosis factor induces NF- « B translocation but not human immunodeficiency virus 1 enhancer-dependent transcription .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 87:7861-7865 .
20 .
Hellerstein , M. K. , and J. M. McCune .
1997 .
T cell turnover in HIV-1 discase .
Immunity 7:583-589 .
21 .
Herbelin , A. , F. Machavoine , E. Schneider , M. Papiernik , and M. Dy .
1992 .
IL-7 is requisite for IL-1-induced thymocyte proliferation .
Involvement of IL-7 in the synergistic effects of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor or tumor necrosis factor with IL-1 .
J. Immunol .
148:99-105 .
22 .
Herbelin , A. , F. Machavoine , A. Vicari , E. Schneider , M. Papiemnik , H. Ziltener , C. Penit , and M. Dy .
1994 .
Endogenous granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor is involved in IL-1- and IL-7-induced murine thymocyte proliferation .
J. Immunol .
153:1973-1981 .
23 .
Hernandez-Caselles , T. , M. Martinez-Esparza , D. Sancho , G. Rubio , and P. Aparicio .
1995 .
Interleukin-7 rescues human activated T lymphocytes from apoptosis induced by glucocorticosteroids and regulates bel-2 and CD25 expression .
Hum .
Immunol .
43:181-189 .
24 .
Ho , D. D. , A. U. Neumann , A. S. Perelson , W. Chen , J. M. Leonard , and M. Markowitz .
1995 .
Rapid turnover of plasma virions and CD4 lymphocytes in HIV-1 infection .
Nature 373:123-126 .
25 .
Israél , A. , O. Yano , F. Logeat , M. Kieran , and P. Kourilsky .
1989 .
Two purified factors bind to the same sequence in the enhancer of mouse MHC class I genes : one of them is a positive regulator induced upon differentiation of teratocarcinoma cells .
Nucleic Acids Res .
17:5245-5257 .
25a.Israél , A .
Personal communication .
26 .
Israél , N. , U. Hazan , J. Alcami , A. Munier , F. Arenzana-Seisdedos , F. Bachelerie , A. Israél , and J. L. Virelizier .
1989 .
Tumor necrosis factor stimulates transcription of HIV-1 in human T lymphocytes , independently and syner-gistically with mitogens .
J. Immunol .
143:3956-3960 .
27 .
Iversen , P. O. , L. B .
To , and A. F. Lopez .
1996 .
Apoptosis of hemopoictic cells by the human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor mutant E21R .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 93:2785-2789 .
28 .
Joshi , V. V. , J. M. Oleske , S. Saad , C. Gadol , E. Connor , R. Bobila , and A .
B. Minnefor .
1986 .
Thymus biopsy in children with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome .
Arch .
Pathol .
Lab .
Med .
110:837-842 .
29 .
Kinoshita , S. , L. S. Su , M. Amano , L. A. Timmerman , H. Kaneshima , and G. P. Nolan .
1997 .
The T cell activation factor NF-ATc positively regulates HIV-1 replication and gene expression in T cells .
Immunity 6:235-244 .
30 .
Kinoshita , T. , T. Yokoda , K. Arai , and A. Miyajima .
1995 .
Regulation of Bcl-2 expression by oncogenic Ras protein in hematopoctic cells .
Oncogene 10:2207-2212 .
31 .
Kitano , K. , C. N. Abboud , D. H. Ryan , S. G. Quan , G. C. Baldwin , and D. W. Golde .
1991 .
Macrophage-active colony-stimulating factors enhance human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in bone marrow stem cells .
Blood 77:1699-1705 .
32 .
Kitchen , S. G. , C. H. Uittenbogaart , and J .
A. Zack .
1997 .
Mechanism of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 localization in CD4-negative thymo-cytes-differentiation from a CD4-positive precursor allows productive infection .
J. Virol .
71:5713-5722 .
33 .
Kopp , E. B. , and S. Ghosh .
1995 .
NF-kappa B and rel proteins in innate immunity .
Adv .
Immunol .
58:1-27 .
34 .
Le , P. T. , S. Lazorick , L. P. Whichard , Y.-C. Yang , S. C. Clark , B. F. Haynes , and K. H. Singer .
1990 .
Human thymic epithelial cells produce IL-6 , gran- voL .
73 , 1999 35 .
36 .
37 .
38 .
39 .
40 .
41 .
42 .
43 .
44 .
45 .
46 .
47 .
48 .
49 .
50. ulocyte-monocyte-CSF , and leukemia inhibitory factor .
J. Immunol .
145 : 3310-3315 .
Leonard , J. , C. Parrott , W. A. Buckler , W. Turner , E. K. Ross , M. A. Martin , and A .
B. Rabson .
1989 .
The NF-kappa B binding sites in the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 long terminal repeat are not required for virus infectivity .
J. Virol .
63:4919-4924 .
Leonard , W. J. , E. W. Shores , and P. E. Love .
1995 .
Role of the common cytokine receptor gamma chain in cytokine signaling and lymphoid development .
Immunol .
Rev .
148:97-114 .
Lernbecher , T. , U. Muller , and T. Wirth .
1993 .
Distinct NF-kappa B/Rel transcription factors are responsible for tissue-specific and inducible gene activation .
Nature 365:767-770 .
Lin , J. X. , T. S. Migone , M. Tsang , M. Friedmann , J .
A. Weatherbee , L. Zhou , A. Yamauchi , E. T. Bloom , J. Mictz , S. John , and W. J. Leonard .
1995 .
The role of shared receptor motifs and common Stat proteins in the generation of cytokine pleiotropy and redundancy by IL-2 , IL-4 , IL-7 , IL-13 , and IL-15 .
Immunity 2331-339 .
May , M. J. , and S. Ghosh .
1997 .
Rel/NF-kappa B and I kappa B proteins : an overview .
Semin .
Cancer Biol .
8:63-73 .
McCune , J. M. 1997 .
Thymic function in HIV-1 disease .
Semin .
Immunol .
9:397-404 .
Montgomery , R. A. , and M. J. Dallman .
1997 .
Semi-quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis of cytokine and cytokine receptor gene expression during thymic ontogeny .
Cytokine 9:717-726 .
Murray , R. , T. Suda , N. Wrighton , F. Lee , and A. Zlotnik .
1989 .
IL-7 is a growth and maintenance factor for mature and immature thymocyte subsets .
Int .
Immunol .
1:526-531 .
Okazaki , H. , M. Ito , T. Sudo , M. Hattori , S. Kano , Y. Katsura , and N. Minato .
1989 .
IL-7 promoters thymocyte proliferation and maintains immu-nocompetent thymocytes bearing alpha beta or gamma delta T-cell receptors in vitro : synergism with IL-2 .
J. Immunol .
143:2917-2922 .
Osborn , L. , S. Kunkel , and G. J. Nabel .
1989 .
Tumor necrosis factor alpha and interleukin 1 stimulate the human immunodeficiency virus enhancer by activation of the nuclear factor kappa B. Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 86 : 2336-2340 .
Papiernik , M. , Y. Brossard , N. Mulliez , J. Roume , C. Brechot , F. Barin , A. Goudeau , J. F. Bach , C. Griscelli , R. Henrion , and R. Vazeux .
1992 .
Thymic abnormalities in fetuses aborted from human immunodeficiency virus type 1 seropositive women .
Pediatrics 89:297-301 .
Plum , J. , S. M. De , G. Leclercq , B. Verhasselt , and B. Vandekerckhove .
1996 .
Interleukin-7 is a critical growth factor in carly human T-cell development .
Blood 88:4239-4245 .
Rosenzweig , M. , D. P. Clark , and G. N. Gaulton .
1993 .
Selective thymocyte depletion in neonatal HIV-1 thymic infection .
AIDS 7:1601-1605 .
Rothe , M. , L. Chéne , M. Nugeyre , F. Barré-Sinoussi , and N. Israél .
1998 .
Contact with thymic epithelial cells as a prerequisite for cytokines enhanced HIV-1 replication in thymocytes .
J. Virol .
72:5852-5861 .
Sakata , T. , S. Iwagami , Y. Tsuruta , H. Teraoka , Y. Tatsumi , Y. Kita , S. Nishikawa , Y. Takai , and H. Fujiwara .
1990 .
Constitutive expression of IL-7 mRNA and production of IL-7 by a cloned thymic stromal cell line .
J. Leu-koc .
Biol .
48:205-209 .
Sanchez-Pescador , R. , M. Power , P. Barr , K. Steimer , M. Stempien , S. Brown-Shimer , W. Gee , A. Renard , A. Randolph , and J .
Levy .
1985 .
Nucle-otide sequence and expression of an AIDS-associated retrovirus ( ARV-2 ) .
Science 227:484-494 .
NF- « B-DEPENDENT HIV-1 REPLICATION IN THYMUS 51 .
52 .
53 .
54 .
55 .
56 .
57 .
58 .
59 .
60 .
61 .
62 .
63 .
64 .
65 .
66 .
67 .
2073 Santee , S. M. , and S. L. Owen .
1996 .
Human tumor necrosis factor receptor p75/80 ( CD120b ) gene structure and promoter characterization .
J. Biol .
Chem .
271:21151-21159 .
Schwartz , O. , J. Virelizier , L. Montagnier , and U. Hazan .
1990 .
A micro-transfection method using the luciferase encoding reporter gene for the assay of HIV LTR promoter activity .
Gene 88:197-205 .
Seth , A. , D. R. Hodge , D. M. Thompson , L. Robi A. P : iotakis , D. K. Watson , and T. S. Papas .
1993 .
ETS family proteins activate transcription from HIV-1 long terminal repeat .
AIDS Res .
Hum .
Retroviruses 9:1017-1023 .
Stanley , S. K. , J. M. McCune , H. Kaneshima , J. S. Justement , M. Sullivan , E. Boone , M. Baseler , J. Adelsberger , M. Bonyhadi , J. Orenstein , C. H. Fox , and A. S. Fauci .
1993 .
Human immunodeficiency virus infection of the human thymus and disruption of the thymic microenvironment in the SCID-hu mouse .
J. Exp .
Med .
178:1151-1163 .
Stein , B. , A. S. Baldwin , D. W. Ballard , W. C. Greene , P. Angel , and P. Herrlich .
1993 .
Cross-coupling of the NF-kappa-B p65 and Fos/Jun transcription factors produces potentiated biological function .
EMBO J .
12 : 3879-3891 .
Su , L. , H. Kaneshima , M. Bonyhadi , S. Salimi , D. Kraft , L. Rabin , and J. M. McCune .
1995 .
HIV-1-induced thymocyte depletion is associated with indirect cytopathicity and infection of progenitor cells in vivo .
Immunity 2:25-36 .
Sudo , T. , S. Nishikawa , N. Ohno , N. Akiyama , M. Tamakoshi , H. Yoshida , and S. Nishikawa .
1993 .
Expression and function of the interleukin 7 receptor in murine lymphocytes .
Proc .
Natl .
Acad .
Sci .
USA 90:9125-9129 .
Tanaka , K. E. , W. C. Hatch , Y. Kress , R. Soeiro , T. Calvelli , W. K. Rash-baum , A. Rubinstein , and W. D. Lyman .
1992 .
HIV-1 infection of human fetal thymocytes .
J .
Acquired Immune Defic .
Syndr .
5:94-101 .
Uittenbogaart , C. H. , D. J. Anisman , B. D. Jamieson , S. Kitchen , I. Schmid , J .
A. Zack , and E. F. Hays .
1996 .
Differential tropism of HIV-1 isolates for distinct thymocyte subsets in vitro .
AIDS 10:9-16 .
Valentin , H. , M.-T. Nugeyre , F. Vuillier , L. Boumsell , M. Schmid , F. Barré-Sinoussi , and R. Pereira .
1994 .
Two subpopulations of human triple-negative thymic cells are susceptible to infection by human immunodeficiency virus type 1 in vitro .
J. Virol .
68:3041-3050 .
Wei , X. , S. K. Ghosh , M. E. Taylor , V. A. Johnson , E. A. Emini , P. Deutsch , J. D. Lifson , S. Bonhoefer , M. A. Nowak , B. H. Hahn , M. S. Saag , and G. M. Shaw .
1995 .
Viral dynamics in human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection .
Nature 373:117-122 .
Weib , F. , D. Carrasco , and R. Bravo .
1994 .
Constitutive and inducible Rel/ NF-kappa B activities in mouse thymus and spleen .
Oncogene 9:3289-3297 .
Whiteside , S. , M. Ernst , O. Lebail , C. Laurent-Winter , N. Rice , and A. Israel .
1995 .
N- and C-terminal sequences control degradation of MAD3/I « Ba in response to inducers of NF-kappa B activity .
Mol .
Cell .
Biol .
15:5339-5345 .
Whiteside , S. T. , and A. Israél .
1997 .
I kappa B proteins : structure , function and regulation .
Semin .
Cancer Biol .
8:75-82 .
Withersward , E. S. , R. G. Amado , P. S. Koka , B. D. Jamieson , A. H. Kaplan , I. Chen , and J .
A. Zack .
1997 .
Transient renewal of thymopoiesis in HIV-infected human thymic implants following antiviral therapy .
Nat .
Med .
3:1102-1109 .
Wolf , S. S. , and A. Cohen .
1992 .
Expression of cytokines and their receptors by human thymocytes and thymic stromal cells .
Immunology 77:362-368 .
Zuniga-Pfliicker , J. C. , D. Jiang , and M. J. Lenardo .
1995 .
Requirement for TNF- « and IL-la in fetal thymocyte commitment and differentiation .
Science 268:1906-1909 .
