738 Ann Rheum Dis 1998 ; 57:738-741 CONCISE REPORTS Departamento de Medicina , Rheumatology Unit , Hospital Universitario `` Reina Sofia `` , Spain E Collantes E Aranda Departamento de Fisiologia e Inmunologia , Facultad de Medicina , Universidad de Cordoba , Spain M Valle Blazquez V Mazorra A Macho E Mufioz Correspondence to : Professor E Collantes-Estévez , Departamento de Medicina , Unidad de Reumatologia .
Facultad de Medicina , Avda Menéndez Pidal s/n , E-14071 Cordoba , Spain .
Accepted for publication 23 September 1998 Nuclear factor- « xB activity in T cells from patients with rheumatic diseases : A preliminary report Eduardo Collantes , M Valle Blazquez , Vivian Mazorra , Antonio Macho , Enrique Aranda , Eduardo Mufioz Abstract Objective-The NF-xB/Rel family of transcription factors regulates the expression of many genes involved in the immune or inflammatory response at the transcriptional level .
The aim of this study was to determine whether distinctive patterns of NF-kB activation are seen in different forms of joint disease .
Methods-The DNA binding activity of these nucleoproteins was examined in purified synovial and peripheral T cells from patients with various chronic rheumatic diseases ( 12 ; four with rheumatoid arthritis ; five with spondyloarthropathies ; and three with osteoarthritis ) .
Results-Electrophoretic mobility shift assays disclosed two specific complexes bound to a NF-xB specific `` P-labelled oligonucleotide in nucleoproteins extracted from purified T cells isolated from synovial fluid and peripheral blood of patients with rheumatoid arthritis .
The complexes consisted of p50/p50 homodimers and p50/ p65 heterodimers .
Increased NF-kB binding to DNA in synovial T cells was observed relative to peripheral T cells .
In non-rheumatoid arthritis , binding of NF-xB in synovial T cells was exclusively mediated by p50/p50 homodimers .
Conclusion-Overall , the results suggest that NF-xB may play a central part in the activation of infiltrating T cells in chronic rheumatoid arthritis .
The activation of this nuclear factor is qualitatively different in rheumatoid synovial T cells to that in other forms of non-rheumatoid arthritis ( for example , osteoarthritis , spondy-loarthropathies ) .
( Ann Rheum Dis 1998 ; 57:738-741 ) Nuclear transcription factors are proteins that bind to promoters and enhancers to stimulate ( or , occasionally , inhibit ) gene transcription through direct interaction with DNA . '
Among those transcription factors , nuclear factor xB ( NF-xB `` ) is one of the most extensively studied .
This factor , formerly described as a x enhancer binding transcription factor constitu-tively present in the nuclei of mature B cells , `` regulates gene transcription by binding to decameric sequences ( kB motifs ) located in the promoter of many cellular and viral genes , particularly those encoding proteins involved in the immune and inflammatory response .
'* NF-xB is made of hetero- or homodimeric combinations of several proteins belonging to the same family ( Rel family ) .
The five known mammalian Rel/NF-xB proteins , NF- « xBl ( p50 ) , NF-xB2 ( p52 ) , RelA ( p65 ) , RelB , and c-Rel , share a highly conserved Rel homology domain that contains sequences required for DNA binding , protein dimerisation , and nuclear localisation . ``
The most common species are p50 subunit homodimers or heterodimers consisting of a p50 subunit and either a p65 ( RelA ) subunit or the product of the c-re/ oncogen ( c-Rel ) .
In most cell types , NF-xB is found in an inactive cytosolic form , retained by association with inhibitory proteins called IkBs .
Upon cell activation by a vast number of agents , IkB undergoes rapid phosphorylation in specific serine residues by the recently discovered IkB kinases , IKKa and IKK $ B , ( reviewed by Stancovski and Baltimore `` ) ubiq-uitination and degradation by the 268 proteasome pathway , `` then releasing the active NF- « B to the nucleus .
To determine whether the pattern of NF-xB activation is qualitatively different in rheumatoid arthritis ( RA ) compared with other rheumatic diseases and hence establish whether this transcription factor plays some part in the pathogenesis of different types of synovitis , we have examined the activation of NF-xB in T cells obtained from peripheral blood ( PT ) and synovial fluid ( ST ) from patients with different types of arthritis , by studying the DNA binding of the NF- « B/Rel transcription factor family in these cells .
We have found a differential pattern of NF-xB binding to DNA in T cells ( ST and PT ) from RA and non-RA patients , and the significance of this finding will be discussed .
Methods PATIENTS Twelve patients ( table 1 ) with different types of synovitis were studied .
Four were diagnosed with RA according to the American College of Rheumatology Criteria ; five with spondyloar-thropathies ( Sp ) according to the Amor and ESSG Criteria ( two with reactive arthritis NF-KB activity in rheumatic diseases 739 Table 1 - Clinical data of patients studied Patient Sex Age Disease RF HLA-27 ANA ESR Hb ( gid ) Treatment 1 F 58 RA + - - 54 13 NSAID 2 M 69 RA + - - 46 11.2 NSAID 3 F 32 RA + - - 52 10.6 MTX 4 F 50 RA + - - 45 11.8 NSAID 5 M 59 SpondyUVReA - + - 12 12 NSAID 6 M 14 SpondyU/ReA - + - 19 14.2 7 M 32 SpondyV/AS - + - 28 14.6 NSAID 8 M 59 SpondyV/AS - + - 32 16.5 NSAID 9 F 25 SpondyV/AS - + + 1/300 13 14.6 NSAID 10 M 65 Ostcoarthritis - - - 2 11.8 11 M 50 Ostcoarthritis - - - 11 16.9 NSAID 12 M 57 Ostcoarthritis - - - 7 14.5 NSAID RF = rheumatoid factor ; B27 = HIA-B27 ; ANA = antinuclear antibodies ; ESR = erythrocyte sedimentation rate ; Hb = haemoglobin .
Spondyl = spondyloarthropathy ; AS = ankylosing spondylitis ; ReA= reactive arthritis .
( ReA ) and three with ankylosing spondylitis ( AS ) ) , and the remaining three with osteoar-thritis ( OA ) .
Informed consent was obtained from all patients participating in this study .
ISOLATION OF PURIFIED T LYMPHOCYTES Synovial fluid was collected by therapeutic knee arthrocentesis from all patients .
Peripheral blood and synovial fluid were collected in heparinised tubes , and mononuclear cells were isolated by Ficoll-Hypaque density gradient centrifugation ( Pharmacia , Piscataway , NJ , USA ) .
Macrophages were depleted by adherence to plastic at 37°C for one hour , and B cells removed by passing the cells through a nylon wool column .
In some experiments , the B cell fraction was removed by immunomagnetic separation using Dynabeads M-450 CD19 ( Dynal , Oslo , Norway ) .
The cell fraction obtained was usually > 90 % CD3* , as determined by immunofluorescence with specific mAbs .
PREPARATION OF PROTEIN EXTRACTS Purified T cells from synovial or blood samples were centrifuged and transferred to Eppendorf tubes , and washed twice with cold phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) .
Sedimented cells were gently resuspended and disrupted in 50 ul of lysis buffer containing 20 mM Hepes pH 7.9 , 0.35 M NaCI , 20 % glycerol , 1 mM MgCl , , 0.5 mM DTT , 0.5 mM EDTA , 0.1 mM EGTA , protease inhibitors ( 1 ug/ml each of apronitin , leupeptin , and pepstatine ) , 1 mM PMSF , and 0.2 % NP-40 at 4° C for 20 minutes .
After lysis , samples were centrifuged at 10 000 x g for five minutes and supernatants carefully recovered .
Protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method .
ELECTROPHORETIC MOBILITY SHIFT ASSAY ( EMSA ) A double stranded oligonucleotide containing the NF-kB binding site located at the enhancer region of the H-2 `` promoter ( KBF ) was used . ``
The binding reagent contained 10 ug of protein , 1 ug poly ( dI-dC ) , 20 mM Hepes ( pH 7.0 ) , 50 mM NaCl , 2 mM DTT , 0.01 % NP-40 , 100 ug/ml BSA , 4 % Ficoll , and 100 000 cpm of end labelled DNA fragments in a final volume of 20 ul .
Where indicated , 0.5 ul of rabbit anti-p50 , anti-p65 , anti c-rel , anti-p52° or preimmune serum was added to the reaction mixture before the addition of the radiolabelled probe .
For cold competition , a 50-fold molar excess of the double stranded oligonucleotide competitor was added to the binding reaction medium .
After 30 minutes incubation at room temperature , the mixture was electrophoresed through a 6 % polyacryla-mide gel under non-denaturing conditions and subsequently dried and exposed to XAR film at -80°C .
Results NF- « B binding to DNA in PT or ST cells from different patients was studied by gel retarda-tion .
An amount of 10 ug of protein extract was incubated with a P-labelled KBF oligonucleotide containing a high affinity binding site for NF-xB . ``
The experiments showed two distinct patterns of NF-xB binding on the 12 patients studied .
PT cells from individual non-RA arthritic patients ( n = 8 ) exhibited a single complex bound to the NF-xB probe ( fig 1A , complex II , AS , ReA ) .
This protein/DNA binding pattern was similar to that found in proteins extracted from PT cells obtained from healthy donors ( data not shown ) .
By contrast , RA patients ( n = 4 ) exhibited binding of two independent com-plexes , one with a migration pattern similar to that of the complex observed in non-RA patients ( complex II ) and the other , of lower mobility , present in both PT and ST cells ( fig 1A , complex I , RA ) .
DNA binding of both complexes was stronger in ST than in PT cells in all RA patients .
To demonstrate the specificity of the NF-xB DNA binding pattern of figure 1A , several cold competition assays were conducted as described above .
As can be seen in figure 1B , the binding activity to the KBF probe detected in ST cells was completely suppressed by a 50-fold molar excess of cold double stranded oligonucleotide containing the NF-xB sequence of the Ig x chain gene .
On the other hand , binding was not hindered by an excess of unrelated oligonucleotides containing the consensus binding sites for OCT-1 and SP-1 transcription factors .
To identify the members of the NF- « B/Rel family of transcription factors involved in the NF-xB binding activity observed in ST cells from patients with different types of arthritis , supershift experiments with specific antisera were carried out .
As can be seen in figure 1C ( left ) , the protein/DNA complexes detected with the NF-kB probe in ST cells ( from a 740 AS AeA AS FAA F 11 1F WT 1 PT ST PT ST PT ST PT ST = | d , -I .
L Rak AS MR | 4 I 1 I I g Gof f ~ Compr tto € & on X ) !
on .
Co Wg & 1o= Go 4B = L Gol 2 Q @ AA AS ri go q e in HH a a B iB = Ab Supershift - ( 8 4 & GC B £ wam C @ ' .
.
=p $ 50/p50 Figure 1 _ ( A ) Nuclear factor xB binding activity in proteins extracted from PT and ST cells belonging to four representative patients .
AS , ankylosing spondylitis ; ReA , reactive arthritis ; RA , rheumatoid arthritis .
Protein extracts were incubated with an end labelled specific xB oligonucleotide and the specific DNA/protein interaction analysed by EMSA .
A section of the gel is shown .
( B ) Specificity of NF-xB binding activity in ST cells in three representative patients .
Nuclear extracts of purified ST cells were incubated with 0.5 ng of an end labelled KBF probe .
Competitor double stranded oligonucleotides were added at a 50-fold molar excess and included oligonucleotide IgkB , which contains the NF-xB motif of the Ig x gene , and the unrelated oligonucleotides OCT1 and Sp-1 .
A section of the gel is shown .
( C ) Identification of NF-KB complexes in ST cells from two representative patients .
Protein extracts from purified T cells were preincubated either with preimmune serum ( ns ) or with specific antiserum for p50 , p65 or p52 , before the addition of KBF probe .
A section of the gel is shown .
representative RA patient ) were almost completely supershifted by anti-p50 antiserum .
On the other hand , the anti-p65 antiserum prevented specifically the binding of the less mobile complex .
Thus , the two main complexes detected in ST cells from RA patients were composed of p50/p50 homodimers and p50/ReIA ( p50/p65 ) heterodimers .
In contrast , analysis of the NF-xB DNA bound complex observed in non-RA arthritic patients showed it to consist exclusively of p50/p50 homodimers because of the presence of anti-p50 , but Collantes , Blazquez , Mazorra , et al neither p65 or p52 antisera , in the binding reaction prevented the binding of such complex to the kB probe ( figure 1C , right ) .
Discussion In this study , we found that the binding of NF-xB to DNA was generally increased in purified synovial T cells from patients with various arthritic diseases when it was compared with peripheral T cells .
The main inference from our results is the presence of p50/p65 heterodimers in PT and ST cells from RA patients , but not in those from other rheumatic diseases .
These results show that NF-xB activation is qualitatively different among the cases studied , possibly as a result of a differential pathogenesis for RA and other rheumatic diseases .
The p50 subunit of the NF-kB family does not have transcriptional activities over NF-kB dependent promoters ; rather , it may be inhibitory . ``
Interestingly , an important pool of p50 proteins is located at the nucleus in non-transformed T cells , `` but after activation by an appropriate stimulus , p50/p65 heterodimers translocate to the nucleus , bind the same NF-xB sites as p50 homodimers , and regulate the transcription of many genes containing NF-xB sites in their regulatory regions . ``
In ST cells from RA patients , a specific stimulus may account for DNA binding of p50/p65 and may be mediated by specific antigen recognition or lymphokines such as tumour necrosis factor a and interleukin 1 .
This stimulus may be different in the other arthropathies studied , which only exhibited an increased binding of p50 homodimers .
In this regard , it is interesting to note that , in addition to NF-xB activation , the binding activity of AP-1 ( another pleiotropic transcription factor ) was only detected in ST cells from RA patients ( data not shown ) .
Although our results were obtained from only 12 patients , these findings suggest that specific activation of NF-xB ( p50/p65 ) may play a pivotal part in the molecular mechanism involved in the pathogenesis of joint diseases in RA patients .
Moreover , it supports the notion that T lymphocyte activation is different in patients with RA from that in patients with other rheumatic diseases as it has been previously suggested . ``
`` To confirm our finding that NF- « B ( p50/p65 ) activation in ST cells may be specifically related to RA patients , we are currently conducting a large scale study of patients with different types of arthritis .
Finally , it is clear that NF-xB may be an attractive target for therapeutic intervention in RA and in other inflammatory diseases .
Proteolytic degradation of IkB and NF-xB activation seems to be regulated by a balance between kinase and phosphatase activities , and the recent identification of two novel IkB kinases involved in NF-xB activation ' opens new avenues for anti-inflammatory drug de-sign .
We wish to acknowledge fellowship from the Fundacion Cajasur-Reina Sofia ( Cordoba , Spain ) .
The authors are also grateful to Dr Alain Israél ( Institute Pasteur , Paris ) for the gift of the NF-xB antiserum .
Funding : this work was supported by CICYT grant SAF 95/0474 .
NF-KB activity in rheumatic diseases 1 Papavasilou AG .
Transcription factors .
N Engl J Med 1995 ; 332:45-7 .
2 Sen R , Baltimore D. Multiple nuclear factors interact with the immunoglobulin enhancer sequences .
Cell 1991 ; 46 : 705-14 .
3 Verma IM , Stevenson JK , Schwarz EM , Van Antwerp D , Miyamoto S. Re/NF-xB/IkB family : intimate tales of association and dissociation .
Genes Dev 1995 ; 9:2723-35 .
4 Finco TS , Baldwin Jr AS .
Mechanistic aspects of NF- « B regulation : the emerging role of phosphorylation and proteolysis .
Immunity 1995 ; 3:263-72 .
5 Grilli M , Chiu JJ , Lenardo M. NF-kappa B and rel : participants in a multiform transcriptional regulatory system .
Int Rev Cytol 1993 ; 143 : 1-62 .
6 Stancovski I. Baltimore D. NF-KB activation .
The IxB kinase revealed ?
Cell 1997 ; 91:299-302 .
7 Traenckner EB-M , Wilk S , Bacuerle PA. A proteasome inhibitor prevents activation of NF-kB and stabilises a newly phosphorylated form of IkBa that it is still bound to NF-kB .
EMBO J 1994 ; 13:5433-441 .
741 8 Kicran M , Blank V , Logeat F , Vandekerckhove J , Lottspeich F , Le Bail O , et al .
The DNA binding subunit of NF-kappa B is identical to factor KBF1 and homologous to the rel onco-gene product .
Gell 1007-18 .
9 Rice NR , Mackichan ML , Israél A .
The precursor of NF-kappaB p50 has IkappaB-like functions .
Cell 1992 ; 71 ; 243-53 .
10 Plaksin D , Baeuerle PA , Eisenbach L. KBF1 ( p50 NF-xB homodimer ) acts as a repressor of H-2K® gene expression in metastatic tumor cells .
J Exp Med 193 ; 177:1651-62 .
11 Kang SM , Tran AC , Grilli M , Lenardo MJ .
NF-xB subunit regulation in non-transformed CD4* T lymphocytes .
Science 1992 ; 256:1452-6 .
12 Allen ME , Young SP , Michell , RH , Bacon PA. Altered T-lymphocyte signaling in rheumatoid arthritis Eur J Immunol 1995 ; 25:1547-54 .
13 Carruthers DM , Naylor WG , Allen ME , Kitas GD , Bacon PA , Young SP .
Characterization of altered calcium signaling in T-lymphocytes from patients with rheumatoid arthritis ( RA ) .
Clin Exp Immunol 1996 ; 105:291-6 .
