From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
RAPID COMMUNICATION Expression of E2A-HLF Chimeric Protein Induced T-Cell Apoptosis , B-Cell Maturation Arrest , and Development of Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia By Hiroaki Honda , Toshiya Inaba , Takahiro Suzuki , Hideaki Oda , Yasuhiro Ebihara , Kohichiro Tsuiji , Tatsutoshi Nakahata , Takatoshi Ishikawa , Yoshio Yazaki , and Hisamaru Hirai The E2A-HLF fusion gene , generated by t ( 17 ; 19 ) ( q22 ; p13 ) in acute lymphoblastic leukemia ( ALL ) , encodes a chimeric transcription factor in which the trans-activating domains of E2A are fused to the DNA-binding and dimerization domains of hepatic leukemic factor ( HLF ) .
To investigate its biological role , we generated transgenic mice expressing E2A-HLF using Ig enhancer and promoter , which direct transgene expression in cells committed to the lymphoid lineage .
The transgenic mice exhibited abnormal development in the thymus and spleen and were susceptible to infection .
The thymus contained small numbers of thymocytes , and TUNEL staining showed that higher population of thymocytes were undergoing apoptosis .
The spleen exhibited a marked reduction in splenic lymphocytes and the flow cytometric analyses HROMOSOMAL TRANSLOCATIONS are recurrent features of human hematopoietic malignancies .
!
Consistently observed chromosomal abnormalities in specific tumors indicate that the underlying genetic events are essentially implicated in the causation of the diseases .
In acute leukemias , several characteristic chromosomal translocations have been noted , and studies on the chromosomal breakpoints have identified candidates of genes whose dysregulated or aberrant expression would be responsible for the tumor development .
!
Transcription factors are frequent target of chromosomal translocations observed in acute lymphoblastic leukemia ( ALL ) .
Among them , E2A gene , encoding a basic helix-loop-helix ( bHLH ) transcription factor on chromosome 19 , has been known to be involved in two chromosomal translocations , t ( 1 ; 19 ) ( q23 ; p13 ) > * and t ( 17 ; 19 ) ( p22 ; q13 ) `` `` that are observed in human B-lineage leukemias .
As a result of t ( 1 ; 19 ) ( q23 ; p13 ) , the C-terminal region of E24 gene , including the bHLH DNA-binding and dimerization domains , is replaced with the DNA-binding domain of PBXI homeobox gene on chromosome 1.54 On the other hand , following the t ( 17 ; 19 ) ( p22 ; q13 ) , the same region of the EZ2A gene is fused to the DNA-binding and dimerization domains of hepatic leukemic factor ( HLF ) gene From the Third Department of Internal Medicine , Faculty of Medicine , University of Tokyo ; the Department of Molecular Biology , Jichi Medical School , Tochigi-ken ; the Department of Pathology , University of Tokyo ; and the Department of Clinical Oncology , Institute of Medical Science , University of Tokyo , Tokyo , Japan .
Submitted October 12 , 1998 ; accepted February 10 , 1999 .
Supported in part by Grants-in-Aids from the Ministry of Education , Science and Culture of Japan .
Address reprint requests to Hisamaru Hirai , MD , Third Department of Internal Medicine , Faculty of Medicine , University of Tokyo , 7-3-1 Hongo , Bunkyo-ku , Tokyo 113 , Japan ; e-mail : hhirai-tky @ umin.ac.jp .
The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge payment .
This article must therefore be hereby marked `` adver-tisement `` in accordance with 18 U.S.C .
section 1734 solely to indicate this fact .
© 1999 by The American Society of Hematology .
0006-4971/99/9309-0145 $ 3.00/0 2780 and the in vitro colony formation assays showed that the B-cell maturation was blocked at a very early developmental stage .
These findings indicated that the expression of E2A-HLF induced T-cell apoptosis and B-cell maturation arrest in vivo and that the susceptibility of the transgenic mice to infection was due to immunodeficiency .
Moreover , several transgenic mice developed acute leukemia , classified as T-ALL based on the surface marker analysis and DNA rear-rangements , suggesting that an additional event is required for malignant transformation of lymphoid cells expressing E2A-HLF Our findings provide insight into the biological function of E2A-HLF in lymphoid development and also its role in leukemogenesis .
© 1999 by The American Society of Hematology .
belonging to the basic region/leucine zipper ( bZIP ) family on chromosome 17.5 % These events create novel fusion gene products , £2A-PBXI and E2A-HLF , respectively , and the expression of these chimeric transcription factors with altered structural and functional features would play a substantial role in the leukemogenic process ( es ) .
One of the £E2A-involving chimeric molecules , E24-HLF , was cloned in t ( 17 ; 19 ) ( p22 ; q13 ) -bearing childhood ALL with pro-B immuophenotype .
`` * Structurally , £2A-HLF is composed of the trans-activation domains of £24 and the DNA-binding and dimerization domains of HLF `` EZA was originally identified as an Ig x chain enhancer-binding protein ' and has been shown to be expressed in many different types of cells . ``
On the other hand , HLF is normally expressed in the liver , kidney , and lung , but not in lymphoid cells . ``
Although both £E2A-HLF and HLF have been shown to bind to the same consensus sequence , 5'-GTTACGTAAT-3 ' , a core dyad-symmetric motif characteristic of bZIP family DNA-binding proteins , `` studies have shown that E2A-HLF and HLF possess different transcriptional and transforming properties . ``
'' £E2A-HLF has an ability to transactivate a reporter gene in various types of cells , such as HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cells , NIH 3T3 fibroblasts , and 293 fetal kidney cells , whereas transactivating ability of wild-type HLF was detected only in 293 cells but was silent in HepG2 and NIH 3T3 cells . ``
In addition , expression of £24-HLF in NIH 3T3 cells induced anchorage-independent cell growth in soft agar and rendered these cells tumorigenic in nude mice , while overexpression of HLF has not been reported to be oncogenic . ``
A subsequent study showed that £E2A-HLF has an anti-apoptotic effect in hematopoietic cell lines . ``
Introduction of a dominant-negative form of EZ2A-HLF , which lacks the trans-activation domains of £24 and contains a defective HLF basic domain , in E2A-HLF-expressing human leukemic cells rapidly induced apoptosis . ``
In addition , the expression of E2ZA-HLF in mouse factor-dependent Ba/F3 cells blocked factor-depleted- and radiation-induced apoptosis . ``
These findings suggest that EZA-HLF would activate genes that are normally quiescent in lymphoid development and that the Blood , Vol 93 , No 9 ( May 1 ) , 1999 ; pp 2780-2790 From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
E2A-HLF TRANSGENIC MICE aberrant gene expression would contribute to the development of ALL .
Although these studies have provided us with insights in the biological properties of £E2A-HLF , the in vivo role of E2A-HLF in lymphoid development and leukemogenesis has not been fully understood .
To address this issue , we generated and analyzed mice expressing E2A-HLF in cells committed to the lymphoid lineage .
MATERIALS AND METHODS Construction of the transgene and generation of the transgenic mice .
The E2A-HLF cDNA® was subcloned into an expression vector which contains Ig enhancer and promoter as regulatory elements .
A fragment encompassing the Ig enhancer/promoter , the £2A-HLF cDNA , and the SV40 early splicing and polyadenylation signals was microinjected into pronuclei of eggs from C57BL/6XDBA/2 F2 mice as described earlier . ``
The transgenic mice were identified by hybridizing tail DNA with the injected fragment `` and the transgenic progeny were generated by successive mating of the founder mice or transgenic descendants with C57BL/6XDBA/2 F1 mice .
The mice were kept under a conventional maintaining condition or in a separated clean isolator .
Pathological examination .
- After gross examination , all the tissues were fixed in 10 % phosphate-buffered saline ( PBS ) -buffered formalde-hyde , embedded in paraffin , and stained with hematoxylin-eosin ( HE ) .
Smears of peripheral blood cells were stained with Wright-Giemsa ( WG ) .
Protein extraction , immunoprecipitation , and Western blotting .
- Tissues were homogenized in RIPA lysis buffer ( 150 mmol/L NaCl , 50 mmol/L Tris-Cl ( pH 7.4 ) , 1 % Triton X-100 , 0.05 % sodium dodecyl sulfate , 1 % sodium deoxycholate ) with 50 U/mL aprotinin .
For detecting E2A-HLF protein , 1 mg of protein aliquots were incubated with 1:1,000 diluted anti-£24 antibody `` and immunoprecipitated proteins were probed with 1:1,000 diluted anti-HLF antibody . ``
The positive signals were visualized using the ProtoBlot Western AP system ( Promega , Madison , WI ) .
Immunofluorescent staining .
| Transgenic spleens were fixed in 10 % PBS-buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin .
Specimens were mounted on saline-coated slides , dewaxed in xylin , rehydrated through a graded series of alcohols , and treated with 20 ug/mL proteinase K in 10 mmol/L Tris-Cl ( pH 7.4 ) at 37°C for 15 minutes .
After washing two times with PBS , specimens were stained with 1:100 diluted fluorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) -conjugated anti-B220 monoclonal antibody ( MoAb ) ( Pharmingen , Osaka , Japan ) and 1:50 diluted anti-HLF poly-clonal antibody `` coupled with 1:50 diluted Texas-red-conjugated anti-rabbit antibody ( Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories Inc , West Grove , PA ) .
After washing three times with PBS , specimens were observed under a confocal microscopic system , MRC1024 ( BioRad , Hercules , CA ) .
Detection of apoptotic cells with TdT- mediated dUTP nick end labeling ( TUNEL ) .
Transgenic and nontransgenic thymuses were fixed in 10 % PBS-buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin .
Specimens mounted on saline-coated slides were dewaxed as described above .
After washing two times with PBS , specimens were subjected to TUNEL reaction using in situ cell death detection kit ( Boehringer , Mannheim , Germany ) according to the manufacturer 's instructions and were observed under a confocal microscopic system , MRC1024 ( BioRad ) .
Flow cytometric analysis .
- Cells were stained with FITC- or phyco-erythrin-conjugated commercial MoAbs including anti-Thy-1.2 , anti-B220 , anti-CD4 , anti-CD8 , and anti-CD43 ( Pharmingen ) according to the manufacturer 's instructions .
The stained cells were washed three times with PBS and analyzed on a FACScan ( Becton Dickinson , Sunnyvale , CA ) .
2781 Colony assays .
- Bone marrow cells of transgenic mice and nontransgenic littermates were subjected to the in vitro colony formation assays as described elsewhere .
'* RNA extraction and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction ( RT-PCR ) .
| Total RNA was extracted using the acid guanidine/phenol-chloroform method . ``
'' The RT and PCR amplification reactions were performed as previously detailed . ``
RESULTS Expression of the E2A-HLF transgene product in T and B lymphocytes in the transgenic mice .
- We planned to generate transgenic mice expressing EZ2A-HLF in hematopoietic cells committed to the lymphoid lineage .
With this aim , Ig enhancer and promoter were chosen as regulatory elements .
The schematic model of the transgene is shown in Fig 1A .
Microinjec-tion resulted in generation of three founder mice containing approximately 10 copies of the transgene in a head-to-tail manner ( data not shown ) and two of these three founders ( named 1-17 and 2-17 ) transmitted the transgene stably to their progeny .
To examine the expression of the transgene product in the lymphoid tissues , proteins extracted from the thymus and the spleen of a transgenic mouse and a nontransgenic littermate were immunoprecipitated with anti-£24 antibody and immunoprecipitated proteins were blotted with anti-HLF antibody .
As shown in Fig 1B , the expression of EZA-HLF protein was detected in the thymus but was undetectable in the spleen in both lines , raising a question of whether B lymphocytes expressed the EZA-HLF transgene product .
To address this issue , we performed immunofluorescent staining of the transgenic spleen using FITC-conjugated anti-B220 antibody and anti-HLF antibody coupled with Texas-red-conjugated anti-rabbit antibody .
The results showed that cells expressing B220 were positive for HLF ( Fig 1C ) .
Because HLF has not been shown to be expressed in the hematopoietic cells , `` HLF* lymphocytes are considered to express £2A-HLF protein .
These results showed that both T and B lymphocytes expressed the E2A-HLF transgene product in the transgenic mice .
E2A-HLF transgenic mice were susceptible to infection .
The transgenic mice were initially kept under a conventional maintaining condition .
Under this condition , although the transgenic mice grew normally until weaning ( 4 weeks of age ) , they gradually exhibited emaciation and almost all the transgenic mice died within several months after birth , in contrast to the fact that no nontransgenic littermates died within the same period .
Autopsies of the dead animals showed abscesses , strongly suggesting that the transgenic mice were susceptible to infection .
To address this issue , newly weaned transgenic and nontransgenic littermates ( 4 weeks of age ) were divided into two groups and mice in one group were kept under the same conventional condition , whereas mice in the other group were maintained in a separated clean isolator .
As a result of about 3 months of observation , we found that the transgenic mice that grew under the conventional condition also showed a high mortality rate ( 5 of 17 transgenic mice were alive more than 4 months of age ) , whereas the transgenic mice that grew in a clean isolator exhibited much better surviving rate ( 14 of 16 transgenic mice are surviving over 4 months of age ) ( Fig 2 , right ) .
During this period , no nontransgenic mice died under either condition ( Fig 2 , left ) .
To investigate the cause of the death of From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
2782 HONDA ET AL Ig SV40 enhancer E2A-HLF cDNA splicing and promoter poly ( A ) signal ___ : > - » + < ?
P1 P3 P4 P2 icing PO ' Y ( A ) splicing signal 1 Kb B thymus - spleen I -I x\_x\ A _ ( Kd ) 0\ `` v0 ’ \ `` v 66 E2A-HLF - » ig - » 45 the transgenic mice , tissues of the dead or moribund mice were pathologically examined .
In about half of the mice examined , macroscopic abscesses were found in several major organs such as the liver , spleen , and intestine .
Microabscesses were detected in all the cases and were accompanied by tissue necrosis and infiltration of granulocytes .
Staining of stamp specimens of the abscesses showed proliferation of bacteria .
These results indicated that the transgenic mice were susceptible to infection and that the major cause of early death of the transgenic mice was bacterial infection .
Decrease in thymocytes and marked reduction in splenic lymphocytes in EZA-HLE transgenic mice .
To examine whether the expression of E2A-HLF affected the development of the lymphoid tissues , transgenic mice and nontransgenic ( % ) ( % ) o ( n=15 ) _ 109 =============iM=l3 ) 100 -- -- ( n=16 ) so - 80 7 m so- eo 2 2 40 - ao ir ( n=17 ) 20 - 20 4 0 -f -- - 0 4 o eo 120 o so 120 ( days ) Age Fig 2 .
- Survival curves of transgenic mice ( Tg , right ) and nontransgenic controls ( C , left ) that are kept under a conventional condition ( solid lines ) or in a clean isolator ( dotted lines ) .
The life span is presented by the Kaplan-Meier method .
Fig 1 .
( A ) Schematic model of the injection fragment for generating E2A-HLF transgenic mice .
The Ig enhancer/ promoter , the E24-HLFcDNA , and the SV40 early splicing and poly ( A ) signals are shown as white , black , and shaded boxes , respectively .
The positions of primers used for RT-PCR ( P1-P4 ) are also indicated .
The bar shows 1 kb .
( B ) Western blot analysis for the expression of the E2A-HLF transgene product in the thymus and spleen of a control mouse ( C ) and a transgenic mouse from two independent lines ( 1-17 and 2-17 ) .
The positions of E2A-HLF protein and Ig are indicated by arrows , and the positions of the molecular marker are show n on the left .
littermates at 4 weeks of age were autopsied and macroscopi-cally examined .
Consistent and remarkable changes were detected in the thymus and in the spleen .
The thymuses of the transgenic mice were apparently smaller than those of the nontransgenic littermates .
The spleens of the transgenic mice were consistently larger than those of the nontransgenic litter mates .
The representative macroscopic appearances of a transgenic mouse and a nontransgenic littermate are shown in Fig 3 .
To investigate the histological changes underlying the phenotypic abnormalities , the thymuses and spleens of transgenic mice and nontransgenic littermates at 4 weeks of age were subjected to microscopic examination .
Significant changes were observed in the medulla of the thymus and in the white pulps of the spleen .
In comparison with the nontransgenic thymus , the transgenic thymus showed enlargement of the medulla , and obscurity and irregularity of the medulla/cortex junction ( Fig 4A , top panels ) .
The medulla of the transgenic thymus contained small numbers of lymphoid cells and consisted mainly of epithelial cells and interdigitating cells .
Infiltration of neutro-phils , multinucleated giant cells , and tingeble-body macrophages were frequently seen ( Fig 4A , bottom panels ) .
As for the spleen , the fundamental structure of the spleen ( integrity of white and red pulps ) was disorganized in the transgenic mice in comparison with the nontransgenic littermates ( Fig 4B , top panels ) .
The periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths in the transgenic spleen were irregularly shaped where lymphoid cells were markedly depleted and neutrophils and megakaryocytes infiltrated ( Fig 4B , bottom panels ) .
These findings showed that the thymic regression was due to decrease in thymocyte number and that the splenic enlargement was associated with marked From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
C anti-B220 anti-HLF Fig 1 .
( Cont 'd ) .
( C ) Immunofluorescent staining of the transgenic spleen with anti-B220 and anti-HLF antibodies .
The B220-expressing and HLFexpressing cells are visualized by green and red signals , Fig 3 .
- Macroscopic appearances of a transgenic mouse ( Tg ) and a respectively .
nontransgenic control ( C ) ( 4 weeks of age ) .
The thymuses and spleens are indicated by ( A ) and ( A ) , respectively .
The transgenic mouse exhibits regressed thymus and enlarged spleen .
a oie We Toren M ‘ H ‘ l- 168 ; Fig 4 .
HE-stained sections of the thymus ( A ) and spleen ( B ) of a transgenic mouse ( Tg ) and a nontransgenic control ( C ) ( 4 weeks of age ) .
The boxed areas in the top panels are magnified in the bottom panels .
( A ) Thymus .
In the lower magnification ( top panels ) , transgenic thymus shows enlargement of the medulla and obscurity and irregularity of the medulla/ cortex junction .
In the higher magnification ( bottom panels ) , the medulla of the transgenic thymus contains few er thymocytes and consists of epithelial and interdigitating cells .
Infiltrated neutrophils and multi- 5 `` ets .
nucleated giant cells are indicated by black and £igfa { Faxing `` ara Z W ﬁg af “ if “ ; y white triangles , respectively , and the tingeble-body _ | j ay t ke L- ® ; f macrophages are indicated by an arrow .
( B ) Spleen .
- , .
aat al.. h seran / +2 ; 3 In the lower magnification ( top panels ) , transgenic spleen shows marked disorganization in the fundamental structures .
In the higher magnification ( bottom panels ) , in a w hite pulp of the transgenic spleen , lymphocytes are markedly reduced and proliferation of neutrophils and megakaryocytes is observed .
The central splenic artery , which is located in the middle of the white pulp , is indicated by an arrow .
From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
2784 J > spleen C Tg HONDA ET AL % hut a mk Pal ma “ : ” 21 ; A| t B o F5 ?
FE : a ; 5 , 710° 10 ) 102 10° 10+ 710° 10 ) 10° 10° 10+ -- p P bone marrow t C hos Tg o o : m MCI “ ; ME “ ; o | ° : = 3 o I m , 4 an ; - aﬁ /g < gorrme remy gormmny -g-rrme Fig 6 .
Flow cytometric analysis of the spleen ( A ) 1an 10 “ 32 103 10+ ﬁnd 10 ' “ 32 `` 33 10+ and bone marrow ( B ) of a transgenic mouse ( Tg ) and -- - » B220 depletion of splenic lymphocytes and diffuse proliferation of other hematopoietic cells .
Increased thymocyte apoptosis in E2A-HLF transgenic mice .
The decrease in thymocyte number is suggestive of either reduction of thymocyte production or alteration in thymocyte survival .
The pathological findings that the thymocyte decrease was associated with macrophage infiltration is in agreement with the latter possibility .
To confirm this , the thymuses of transgenic mice and nontransgenic littermates were subjected to TUNEL staining , which detects apoptotic cells by in situ labeling using TdT and dUTP . ``
'' As shown in Fig 5 ( see page 2785 ) , the number of positively stained cells was significantly increased in the transgenic thymus in comparison with the nontransgenic thymus , showing that the decrease in thymocyte number was caused by increased apoptosis .
To investigate whether the thymocyte apoptosis was due to a differentiation block at a specific developmental stage , the transgenic thymocytes were subjected to flow cytometric analysis using anti-CD4 and anti-CD8 antibodies .
Repeated experiments showed that the percentage of each CD4/CD8 subset ( CD4-/CD8~ , CD4+*/ CD8+ , CD4*/CD8~ , and CD4-CD8* ) was not significantly a nontransgenic control ( C ) with B220 and anti-CD43 antibodies ( 4 weeks of age ) .
The transgenic spleen and bone marrow show marked reduction of both B220+ CD43+ and B220+ CD43~ populations .
altered between the transgenic and nontransgenic thymuses ( data not shown ) .
These results indicated that the expression of E2A-HLF induced thymocyte apoptosis with no obvious interference in thymocyte differentiation .
Maturation block of B-cell progenitors in E2A-HLF transgenic mice .
- The pathological analysis of the transgenic spleen showed a marked decrease in splenic lymphocytes ( Fig 4B ) .
These findings strongly suggest that the expression of E2A-HLF impaired B-cell development as well as induced T-cell apoptosis .
To address this possibility and to identify the stages in which the B-cell development was impaired , splenic and bone marrow cells of the transgenic mice and nontransgenic litter mates were subjected to flow cytometric analysis with anti-B220 and anti-CD43 antibodies .
The B220+* CD43* population contains mainly early B-cell progenitors , whereas B220+* CD43~ population consists of pre-B and mature B lympho-cytes . ``
As shown in Fig 6A and B , significant changes were observed in the B220+* CD43* as well as the B220+ CD43~ population both in the spleen and in the bone marrow .
The nontransgenic spleen and bone marrow contained approximately 6 % to 10 % of B220+* CD43* cells , whereas only 2 % to From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
E2A-HLF TRANSGENIC MICE Fig 5 .
TUNEL staining of the thymus of a transgenic mouse ( Tg ) and a nontransgenic control ( C ) ( 4 weeks of age ) .
Apoptotic thymocytes are detected as yellow signals and background cells are seen as green signals .
The transgenic thymus exhibits increased number of thymocytes undergoing apoptosis .
2785 3 % cells were positive for both B220 and CD43 in the transgenic spleen and bone marrow ( Fig 6A and B ) .
More remarkable is the reduction in B220+* CD43~ late progenitor population .
In the transgenic spleen and bone marrow , this population was reduced to 5 % to 8 % , as compared with 30 % to 40 % in the nontransgenic spleen and bone marrow ( Fig 6A and B ) .
In addition , no B cells expressing high levels of B220 were detected in the transgenic spleen or bone marrow ( Fig 6A and B ) .
These results showed that both early and late B-cell progenitors were severely reduced in the transgenic mice .
We then investigated whether hematopoietic progenitor cells having a potential to differentiate into B220+* cells might exist in the transgenic bone marrow .
The bone marrow cells from transgenic mice and nontransgenic littermates were cultured with interleukin-7 ( IL-7 ) and stem cell factor ( SCF ) , which can recapitulate B-cell differentiation in vitro .
'* Interestingly , although the colony numbers varied among experiments , we found that the transgenic bone marrow could develop B-cell ( D ) spleen Fig 8 .
Pathological analysis of acute leukemia developed in E2A-HLF transgenic mice .
( A ) Macroscopic appearance of a leukemic mouse .
The enlarged thymus and spleen are indicated by black and white triangles , respectively , and subcutaneous lymph node swellings are indicated by arrows .
( B ) WG-stained peripheral blood smear of a leukemic mouse .
Massive proliferation of lymphoblasts is ap-parent .
( C through F ) HE-stained thymus ( C ) , spleen ( D ) , liver ( E ) , and kidney ( F ) of a leukemic mouse .
The fundamental structures of the thymus and the spleen are destructed due to massive proliferation of leukemic cells ( C and D , respectively ) and infiltration of leukemic cells is detected around the blood vessels in the liver and the kidney ( E and F , respectively ) .
From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
2786 Table 1 .
In Vitro B-Cell Colony Formation by IL-7 + SCF +rCs -rcs C-1 10.5 + 3.3 10.5 + 4.4 C2 3.8 + 1.0 3.5 + 1.7 Tg-1 25.5 + 5.5 16.8 + 3.0 Tg-2 7.0 + 1.4 5.5 + 0.6 Colonies were generated with IL-7 + SCF with or without fetal calf serum ( FCS ) .
Abbreviations : C , control ; Tg , transgenic .
colonies as well as the nontransgenic bone marrow ( Table 1 ) .
To confirm that the colonies generated with IL-7 and SCF were committed to the B-cell lineage , cells from the colonies were subjected to flow cytometric analysis with anti-B220 and anti-CD43 antibodies .
As shown in Fig 7A , both colonies were positive for B220 and showed the same broad pattern for CD43 , demonstrating that they both consisted of early and late B-cell progenitors .
To further confirm that the B-cell colonies devel- A B cell colony C HONDA ET AL oped from transgenic bone marrow expressed E2A-HLF transgene product , mRNA extracted from the colonies were subjected to RT-PCR analysis .
By use of the primers encompassing the splicing signal ( P1-P4 , see Fig 1 ) , the mRNA-derived PCR product ( 160 bp ) can be distinguished from any contaminating genome-derived PCR product ( 230 bp ) , because 70 bp should be removed by the splicing .
As shown in Fig 7B , we detected the 160-bp band in addition to the 230-bp band in the PCR products generated from the transgenic colonies , indicating that the B-cell colonies developed from transgenic bone marrow expressed transgene-derived mRNA .
The overall results indicated that although hematopoietic progenitor cells having a potential to differentiate into the B-cell progenitors did exist in the transgenic bone marrow , their commitment to the B-cell lineage was blocked at a very early developmental stage .
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia in E2A-HLF transgenic mice .
We found that several transgenic mice developed acute leukemia .
Among 26 transgenic mice that survived more than 4 hos % a ; E Maj mn-C & it * < N N a | + b O | - ] = .
an an 70° 10+ 710° B220 B E2A-HLF C Tg 200 bp-150 bp K-ras < - mRNA < 4- mRNA 10° 10 « - genome Fig 7 .
( A ) Flow cytometric analysis of the B-cell colonies generated from bone marrow of a transgenic mouse ( Tg ) and a nontransgenic control ( C ) with anti-B220 and anti-CD43 antibodies ( 4 weeks of age ) .
Colonies established from transgenic mice and nontransgenic controls are similarly positive for B220 and show the same broad pattern for CD43 .
( B ) Expression of transgene-derived mRNA in the transgenic B-cell colonies .
The RT-PCR products of the transgenic colonies ( Tg ) and nontransgenic colonies ( C ) were electrophoresed in an agarose gel , stained with ethidium bromide , and photographed .
In the top panel ( E2A-HLF ) , products of genomic and mRNA amplification are indicated by arrows and the position of the DNA size markers are show n on the left .
In the bottom panel ( K-ras ) , K-ras RT-PCR products are show n as an internal control .
From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
E2A-HLF TRANSGENIC MICE 2787 Table 2 .
Characteristics of E2A-HLF Leukemic Mice .
.
.
Hematological Examination Mouse No .
Age at Diagnosis Macroscopic Surface Marker DNA Status ( sex ) { mo ) Tumor Sites WBC ( x109uL ) Hb ( g/dL ) Pit Analysis ( ICR ) Thy1.2 ( + ) 1-17-9 5.5 Thy , Spl , LN 43.8 4.5 6.2 CD4 ( - ) CD8 ( + ) G/R ( M ) ( > 90 % lymphoblasts ) B220 ( - ) Thy1.2 ( + ) 2-17-2 6.0 Thy , Spl , LN 20.5 8.0 10.5 CD4 ( + ) CD8 ( + ) G/R ( F ) ( > 90 % lymphoblasts ) B220 ( - ) Thy1.2 ( + ) 2-17-8-2 4.2 Thy , Spl , LN 19.8 7.7 22.2 CD4 ( + ) CD8 ( - ) G/R ( F ) ( > 90 % lymphoblasts ) B220 ( - ) Thy1.2 ( + ) 2-17-8-4 5.2 Thy , Spl , LN 15.6 8.5 23.3 CD4 ( + ) CD8 ( - ) G/R ( F ) ( > 90 % lymphoblasts ) B220 ( - ) Thy1.2 ( + ) 2-17-10-8 3.1 Thy , Spl , LN 52.3 8.1 30.1 CD4 ( + ) CD8 ( - ) G/R ( M ) ( > 90 % lymphoblasts ) B220 ( - ) Abbreviations : M , male ; F , female ; Thy , thymus ; Spl , spleen ; LN , lymph node ; WBC , white blood cell count ; G , germline ; R , rearranged .
months , 5 have developed acute leukemia .
All the leukemic mice exhibited massive thymic enlargement , splenomegaly , and lymph node swelling ( Fig 8A [ see page 2785 ] ) .
The peripheral blood smears of these mice showed massive proliferation of blast cells with no granules , having the appearance of lymphoblasts ( Fig 8B ) .
Pathological analyses showed infiltration of leukemic cells into almost all tissues examined , especially in the thymus , spleen , liver , and kidney ( Fig 8C through F ) .
The characteristics of the leukemic mice are summarized in Table 2 .
Surface marker analysis of the leukemic cells showed that all the leukemic cells were positive for Thy1.2 but negative for B220 , indicating that the leukemias were of a T-cell phenotype .
Staining of the leukemic cells with anti-CD4 and anti-CD8 antibodies showed that one tumor was double positive ( CD4* CD8+* ) but three cases were single positive for CD4 ( CD4+ CD8~ ) and the other one case was single positive for CD8 ( CD4~ CD8+* ) .
The clonality of the leukemic cells was shown by Southern blot analysis using T-cell receptor ( TCR ) -y as a probe .
These results indicated that the leukemias developed in the transgenic mice were clonal T-cell tumors .
DISCUSSION Generation of transgenic mice has successfully been used for investigating gene functions in Transgenic mice have provided significant insights into the biological properties of the chimeric gene product , especially for genes that are activated by chromosomal translocations , such as Ber/Abl and PML/ RARa . '
> Thus , we applied this technique to investigate the biological function of EZ2A-HLF The use of Ig enhancer/ promoter allowed us to express the £2A-HLF transgene product in both T and B lymphocytes ( Fig 1B and C ) , as shown in previous reports . ``
'' Failure in detecting the £2A-HLF protein in the transgenic spleen by immunoprecipitation/Western blot ( Fig 1B ) was probably due to the reduction in B lymphocytes ( Figs 4B and 6A ) .
Histological analysis showed remarkable changes in the thymus and in the spleen ( Fig 4A and B ) .
The overall decrease in thymocytes and marked reduction in splenic lymphocytes indicated that the expression of E2A-HLF impaired normal lymphocyte development in both T and B lineages .
These results enabled us to explain the cause of the high mortality rate observed in the transgenic mice .
Reduction in the lymphocyte number would render the transgenic mice immunodeficient and highly susceptible to fatal infections .
The finding that transgenic mice kept in a clean isolator survived much longer than those maintained under a conventional condition supports this idea .
The reason why the phenotypic changes ( emaciation and death ) were not observed before weaning could be explained by the notion that the maternal Ig would be transmitted through the milk and rescue the immunodeficiency of the transgenic mice , as suggested in a previous report . ``
'' The TUNEL staining showed that the decrease in thymocyte number was caused by increased apoptosis ( Fig 5 ) .
In addition , the flow cytometric analysis demonstrated that the marked reduction in splenic lymphocytes was caused by the maturation block of B lymphocytes at a very early developmental stage ( Fig 6A and B ) .
Thus , the expression of £2A-HLF in lymphoid cells induced T-cell apoptosis and B-cell maturation arrest in vivo .
Although the precise mechanism is not clear , it could be supposed that £E2A-HLF induced expression of genes regulating cell survival and cell death and led to impairment of normal lymphoid development .
Thus , we compared the expression levels of several candidate genes , including bel-2 , `` `` bel-x , `` `` and Fas , `` in the transgenic and nontransgenic thymuses .
Because we did not detect any differences in their expression levels ( data not shown ) , the abnormal lymphocyte development would be caused by other mechanism ( s ) than we examined .
Interestingly , although B-cell maturation was blocked at a very early stage in vivo , transgenic bone marrow cells restored the ability of developing B-cell progenitors in vitro ( Fig 7 and Table 1 ) , suggesting that some in vivo factor ( s ) might contribute to the abnormal lymphoid development in cooperation with £2A-HLF .
Increased T-cell apoptosis observed in E2A-HLF transgenic mice seems to be inconsistent with the results of experiments using in vitro cell systems , which demonstrated an antiapoptotic function of E2A-HLF .
`` `` `` ° One possible explanation is the difference in the cell lineages .
We observed that UOC-B1 cells , which was established from human pro-B leukemia From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
2788 expressing E2A-HLF , underwent apoptosis by the induction of a dominant-negative form of E2A-HLF . ``
In addition , two murine IL-3-dependent pro-B cell lines , Ba/F3 and FL5.12 , became resistant to apoptosis caused by IL-3 depletion when £E2A-HLF was expressed in these cells . ``
'' `` However , E2A-HLF failed to reverse apoptosis in cytokine-derived 32D cells , a murine IL-3-dependent myeloid cell line ( our unpublished results ) .
These results suggest that the anti-apoptotic function of £2A-HLF might be confined to B-lineage lymphocytes .
Maturation arrest of B lymphocytes , on the other hand , may agree with our recent result obtained using an in vitro experimental system that CD20 , a well-known cell-surface marker for B-cell maturation , is induced by the expression of a dominant-negative form of E2A-HLF in UOC-B1 cells . ``
It is to be noted that several transgenic mice developed acute leukemia .
The leukemic mice exhibited thymic enlargement , splenomegaly , and lymph node swelling ( Fig 8A ) .
The leukemic cells , having the appearance of lymphoblasts ( Fig 8B ) , were highly malignant , showing massive infiltration into almost all the tissues examined ( Fig 8C through F ) .
The leukemic cells were positive for Thy1.2 and carried rearrangements in TCR loci ( Table 2 ) , indicating that they were clonal T-cell tumors .
However , the expression patterns of CD4 and CD8 in each leukemia were heterogeneous ; one tumor was double-positive for CD4 and CD8 , three tumors were single-positive for CD4 , and the other one case was single-positive for CD8 .
Thus , E2A-HLF rendered an oncogenic activity to T cells that are in transition from double-positive to single-positive stage of development .
These results indicated that E2A-HLF possesses an oncogenic potential in addition to inducing T-cell apoptosis and B-cell maturation block .
The finding that 5 of 26 mice that survived more than 4 months developed ALL may suggest that an additional genetic event might be required for disease development .
This idea is in agreement with the findings that E2A-HLF exhibited an oncogenic ability in NIH 3T3 cells ' `` and showed an anti-apoptotic activity in Ba/F3 cells , `` since the transfected cells are immortalized and would carry a genetic abnormality ( ies ) for immortalization .
Therefore , it is likely that E2A-HLF contributes to leukemogenesis in cooperation with another or more genetic event ( s ) .
Interestingly , the phenotypic aspects observed in the £2A-HLF transgenic mice ( T-cell apoptosis , B-cell maturation block , and T-cell leukemia ) closely resemble those reported in the transgenic mice expressing another EZ2A-involving chimeric protein , EZ2A-PBX1 , under the control of the same Ig promoter/ enhancer . ``
If aberrant gene transcription induced by E24-HLF or E2A-PBXI is responsible for the phenotypes , the phenotypic coincidence between both types of transgenic mice seems to be anomalous , because the DNA-binding activities of E2A-HLF and E2ZA-PBX1 are dependent on HLF- and PBX1l-derived regions , respectively , and their experimentally defined binding motifs are completely different ( 5'-GTTACGTAAT-3 ' for HLF and 5'-ATCAATCAA-3 ' for PBX1 ) . ``
'' One possible explanation for this is that a gene ( s ) that is a common target of both E2A-HLF and E2A-PBX1 exists , and its aberrant expression in lymphoid cells impaired normal lymphoid development and led to phenotypic abnormalities .
Another possibility , which seems to be more likely , is that the phenotypes commonly observed in both transgenic mice were caused by a dominant-negative HONDA ET AL inhibition of £24 activity .
This idea could be supported by the finding that mice lacking E24 also exhibited very similar phenotypes .
E2A-deficient mice failed to generate B220* cells because of maturation arrest of B cells at an early developmental stage . ``
'' In addition , they contained a low number of thymocytes and eventually developed T-cell lymphomas . ``
Thus , it would be possible to consider that the biological properties of E2A-HLF and E2A-PBX1 are caused , at least in part , by interfering £24 function .
The results of functional studies of E2A-HLF and E2A-PBXI using cell lines support this idea .
The £E2A-derived regions of E2A-HLF and E2A-PBX1 have been shown to be required for the transactivating and transforming abilities in both chimeric proteins'* `` `` `` `` and also for the anti-apoptotic function of E2A-HLF in TIL-3-dependent murine lymphocytes . ``
'' In con-trast , the bZIP domain of HLF and the homeodomain of which mediate site-specific DNA-binding capacities of £E2A-HLF and EZA-PBX1 , respectively , have been shown to be unnecessary for the transforming ability of or for anti-apoptotic function of E2A-HLFE® `` Tal-1 ( also called as SCL ) , which is a transcription factor belonging the bHLH family and is involved in human T-ALL , is shown to directly bind to £244 % ' and is considered to contribute to leukemogenesis by interfering normal E2A function through forming a heterodimer with £24 . ``
However , it is not the case of E2A-HLF and EZA-PBX1 , because the dimerization domain of £24 is deleted in both proteins .
* `` Thus , although it is likely that the abnormal lymphocyte development observed in the transgenic mice would be induced by a dominant-negative effect on E24 function , the underlying mechanisms have remained to be established .
One possibility to be investigated is that E2A-HLF and E2A-PBX1 might competitively bind to a specific interaction partner of the activation domain of £24 that is expressed in lymphoid cells and is required for £24 activity , through which they inhibit £24 function and induce an E2A-deficient phenotype .
There remains a question concerning the difference in the immunophenotypes of the leukemias between humans and mice .
In humans , £2A-PBX ] is detected in pre-B cell leuke-mias `` and EZA-HLF is associated with pro-B type leuke-mias , `` whereas the leukemias developed in the transgenic mice have so far been diagnosed as T-ALL ( and this report ) .
Although the reason is not clear , one possibility is that Ig enhancer/promoter allowed transgene expression in both in T and B lymphocytes , and T cells might be more susceptible to the oncogenic properties of the chimeric proteins .
The generation of knock-in mice expressing E2A-HLF and EZA-PBX1 under the control of native E2A promoter might clarify the problem concerning the phenotypic disparity between humans and mice .
ACKNOWLEDGMENT We thank Dr TW .
Mak for providing the mouse TCR-y probe .
We thank Yoshikazu Oh-hira for preparing pathological specimens , and we also thank Haruki Kume for photographs .
REFERENCES 1 .
Rabbitts TH : Chromosomal translocations in human cancer [ re-view ] .
Nature 372:143 , 1994 2 .
Cleary ML : Oncogenic conversion of transcription factors by chromosomal translocations .
Cell 66:619 , 1991 From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
E2A-HLF TRANSGENIC MICE 3 .
Kamps MP , Murre C , Sun XH , Baltimore D : A new homeobox gene contributes the DNA binding domain of the t ( 1 ; 19 ) translocation protein in pre-B ALL .
Cell 60:547 , 1990 4 .
Nourse J , Mellentin JD , Galili N , Wilkinson J , Stanbridge E , Smith SD , Cleary ML : Chromosomal translocation t ( 1 ; 19 ) results in synthesis of a homeobox fusion mRNA that codes for a potential chimeric transcription factor .
Cell 60:535 , 1990 5 .
Inaba T , Roberts WM , Shapiro LH , Jolly KW , Raimondi SC , Smith SD , Look AT : Fusion of the leucine zipper gene HLF to the EZA gene in human acute B-lineage leukemia .
Science 257:531 , 1992 6 .
Hunger SP , Ohyashiki K , Toyama K , Cleary ML : HLF , a novel hepatic bZIP protein , shows altered DNA-binding properties following fusion to EZA in t ( 17 ; 19 ) acute lymphoblastic leukemia .
Genes Dev 6:1608 , 1992 7 .
Murre C , McCaw PS , Baltimore D : A new DNA binding and dimerization motif in immunoglobulin enhancer binding , daughterless , MyoD , and myc proteins .
Cell 56:777 , 1989 8 .
Roberts VJ , Steenbergen R , Murre C : Localization of E2A mRNA expression in developing and adult rat tissues .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90:7583 , 1993 9 .
Inaba T , Shapiro LH , Funabiki T , Sinclair AB , Jones BG , Ashmun RA , Look AT : DNA-binding specificity and trans-activating potential of the leukemia-associated EZA-hepatic leukemia factor fusion protein .
Mol Cell Biol 14:3403 , 1994 10 .
Yoshihara T , Inaba T , Shapiro LH , Kato JY , Look AT : E2A-HLF-mediated cell transformation requires both the trans-activation domains of E2A and the leucine zipper dimerization domain of HLF .
Mol Cell Biol 15:3247 , 1995 11 .
Inaba T , Inukai T , Yoshihara T , Seyschab H , Ashmun RA , Canman CB , Laken SJ , Kastan MB , Look AT : Reversal of apoptosis by the leukaemia-associated EZA-HLF chimaeric transcription factor .
Nature 382:541 , 1996 12 .
Look AT : E2A-HLF chimeric transcription factors in pro-B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia .
Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 220:45 , 1997 13 .
Honda H , Fujii T , Takatoku M , Mano H , Witte ON , Yazaki YHH : Expression of p210 `` `` * ' by metallothionein promoter induced T-cell leukemia in transgenic mice .
Blood 85:2853 , 1995 14 .
Akasaka T , Tsuji K , Kawahira H , Kanno M , Harigaya K , Hu L , Ebinata Y , Nakahata T , Tetsu O , Taniguchi M , Koseki H : The role of mel-18 , a mammalian Polycomb group gene , during IL-7-dependent proliferation of lymphocyte precursors .
Immunity 7:135 , 1997 15 .
Chomezinski P , Sacchi N : Single-step method of RNA isolation by acid guanidium thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform extraction .
Anal Biochem 162:156 , 1987 16 .
Sgone R , Boeck G , Dietrich H , Gruber J , Recheis H , Wick G : Simultaneous determination of cell surface antigens and apoptosis .
Trends Genet 10:41 , 1994 17 .
Hardy RR , Carmack CB , Shinton SA , Kemp JD , Hayakawa K : Resolution and characterization of pro-B and pre-pro-B cell stages in normal mouse bone marrow .
J Exp Med 173:1213 , 1991 18 .
Adams JM , Cory S : Transgenic models of tumor development .
Science 254:1161 , 1991 19 .
Heisterkamp N , Jenster G , ten Hoeve J , Zovich D , Pattengale PK , Groffen J : Acute leukaemia in ber/abl transgenic mice .
Nature 344:251 , 1990 20 .
Honda H , Oda H , Suzuki T , Takahashi T , Witte ON , Ozawa K , Ishikawa T , Yazaki Y , Hirai H : Development of acute lymphoblastic leukemia and myeloproliferative disorder in transgenic mice expressing A novel transgenic model for human Ph'-positive leukemias .
Blood 91:2067 , 1998 21 .
Brown D , Kogan S , Lagasse E , Weissman I , Alcalay M , Pelicci PG , Atwater S , Bishop JM : A PML/RARa transgene initiates murine acute promyelocytic leukemia .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:2551 , 1997 2789 22 .
He LZ , Tribioli C , Rivi R , Peruzzi D , Pelicci PG , Soares V , Cattoretti G , Pandolfi PP : Acute leukemia with promyelocytic features in PML/RARa transgenic mice .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:5302 , 1997 23 .
Adams JM , Harris AW , Pinkert CA , Corcoran LM , Alexander WS , Cory S , Palmiter RD , Brinster RL : The c-myc oncogene driven by immunoglobulin enhancers induces lymphoid malignancy in transgenic mice .
Nature 318:533 , 1985 24 .
Yukawa K , Kikutani H , Inomoto T , Uchira M , Bin SH , Akagi K , Yamamura K , Kishimoto T : Strain dependency of B and T lymphoma development in immunoglobulin heavy chain enhancer ( Eu ) -myc transgenic mice .
J Exp Med 170:711 , 1989 25 .
Moroy T , Fisher P , Guidos C , Ma A , Zimmerman K , Tesfaye A , DePinho R , Weissman I , Alt FW : IgH enhancer deregulated expression of L-mye : Abnormal T lymphocyte development and T cell lymphoma-genesis .
EMBO J 9:3659 , 1990 26 .
Shull MM , Ormsby I , Kier AB , Pawlowski S , Diebold RJ , Yin M , Allen R , Sidman C , Procetzel G , Calvin D , Annunziata N , Doetschman T : Targeted disruption of the mouse transforming growth factor-beta 1 gene results in multifocal inflammatory disease .
Nature 359:693 , 1992 27 .
Tsujimoto Y , Finger LR , Yunis J , C. NP , Croce CM : Cloning of the chromosome breakpoint of neoplastic B cells with the t ( 14 ; 18 ) chromosome translocation .
Science 226:1097 , 1984 28 .
Boise LH , Gonzalez-Garcia M , Postema CB , Ding L , Lindsten T , Turka LA , Mao X , Nunez G , Thompson CB : bel-x , a bel-2-related gene that functions as a dominant regulator of apoptotic cell death .
Cell 741597 , 1993 29 .
Itoh N , Yonehara S , Ishii A , Yonehara M , Mizushima S , Sameshima M , Hase A , Seto Y , Nagata S : The polypeptide encoded by the cDNA for human cell surface antigen Fas can mediate apoptosis .
Cell 66:233 , 1991 30 .
Inukai T , Inaba T , Ikushima S , Look AT : The AD1 and AD2Z transactivation domains of EZA are essential for the antiapoptotic activity of the E2A-HLF chimeric oncoprotein .
Mol Cell Biol 18:6035 , 1998 31 .
Goi K , Kurosawa H , Inaba T , Meltzer PS , Look AT : Downstream target genes for E2A-HLF indentified by cDNA microarray analysis .
Blood 92:590a , 1998 ( abstr , suppl 1 ) 32 .
Dedera DA , Waller EK , LeBrun DP , Sen-Majumdar A , Stevens ME , Barsh GS , Cleary ML : Chimeric homeobox gene EZA-PBX1 induces proliferation , apoptosis , and malignant lymphomas in transgenic mice .
Cell 74:833 , 1993 33 .
Lu Q , Wright DD , Kamps MP : Fusion with EZA converts the Pbx1 homeodomain protein into a constitutive transcriptional activator in human leukemias carrying the t ( 1 ; 19 ) translocation .
Mol Cell Biol 14:3938 , 1994 34 .
Bain G , Maandag EC , Izon DJ , Amsen D , Kruisbeck AM , Weintraub BC , Krop I , Schlissel MS , Feeney AJ , van Roon M , van der Valk M , te Ricle HPJ , Berns A , Murre C : E2A proteins are required for proper B cell development and initiation of immunoglobulin gene rearrangements .
Cell 79:885 , 1994 35 .
Zhuang Y , Soriano P , Weintraub H : The helix-loop-helix gene E2A is required for B cell formation .
Cell 79:875 , 1994 36 .
Bain G , Engel I , Robanus Maandag EC , te Riele HP , Voland JR , Sharp LL , Chun J , Huey B , Pinkel D , Murre C : E2A deficiency leads to abnormalities in « B T-cell development and to rapid development of T-cell lymphomas .
Mol Cell Biol 17:4782 , 1997 37 .
Inukai T , Inaba T , Yoshibara T , Look AT : Cell transformation mediated by homodimeric £2A-HLF transcription factor .
Mol Cell Biol 17:1413 , 1997 38 .
Monica K , LeBrun DP , Dedera DA , Brown R , Cleary ML : Transformation properties of the EZa-Pbx1 chimeric oncoprotein : Fusion with E2a is essential , but the Pbx1 homeodomain is dispensable .
Mol Cell Biol 14:8304 , 1994 39 .
Kamps MP , Wright DD , Lu Q : DNA-binding by oncoprotein From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
2790 E2A-Pbx1 is important for blocking differentiation but dispensable for fibroblast transformation .
Oncogene 12:19 , 1996 40 .
Hsu HL , Cheng JT , Chen Q , Baer R : Enhancer-binding activity of the tal-1 oncoprotein in association with the E47/E12 helix-loop-helix proteins .
Mol Cell Biol 11:3037 , 1991 41 .
Hsu HL , Wadman I , Baer R : Formation of in vivo complexes HONDA ET AL between the Tall and EZA polypeptides of leukemic T cells .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91:3181 , 1994 42 .
Larson RC , Lavenir I , Larson TA , Baer R , Warren AJ , Wadman I , Nottage K , Rabbitts TH : Protein dimerization between Lmo2 ( Rbtn2 ) and Tall alters thymocyte development and potentiates T cell tumorigen-esis in transgenic mice .
EMBO J 15:1021 , 1996 From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on May 10 , 2019 .
For personal use only .
® blO 0d 1999 93 : 2780-2790 Expression of E2A-HLF Chimeric Protein Induced T-Cell Apoptosis , B-Cell Maturation Arrest , and Development of Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Hiroaki Honda , Toshiya Inaba , Takahiro Suzuki , Hideaki Oda , Yasuhiro Ebihara , Kohichiro Tsuji , Tatsutoshi Nakahata , Takatoshi Ishikawa , Yoshio Yazaki and Hisamaru Hirai 4 QM “ Caw , .
, ' \se @ .
2 YOtow® @ 207 Updated information and services can be found at : http : //www.bloodjournal.org/content/93/9/2780.full.html Articles on similar topics can be found in the following Blood collections Information about reproducing this article in parts or in its entirety may be found online at : requests Information about ordering reprints may be found online at : http : //www.bloodjournal.org/site/misc/rights.xhtml # reprints Information about subscriptions and ASH membership may be found online at : http : //www.bloodjournal.org/site/subscriptions/index.xhtml Blood ( print ISSN 0006-4971 , online ISSN 1528-0020 ) , is published weekly by the American Society of Hematology , 2021 L St , NW , Suite 900 , Washington DC 20036 .
Copyright 2011 by The American Society of Hematology ; all rights reserved .
