HEMATOPOIESIS GATA-1 and Erythropoietin Cooperate to Promote Erythroid Cell Survival by Regulating bel-x ; , Expression By Todd Gregory , Channing Yu , Averil Ma , Stuart H. Orkin , Gerd A. Blobel , and Mitchell J. Weiss The transcription factor GATA-1 is essential for normal erythropoiesis .
By examining in vitro-differentiated embryonic stem cells , we showed previously that in the absence of GATA-1 , committed erythroid precursors fail to complete maturation and instead undergo apoptosis .
The mechanisms by which GATA-1 controls cell survival are unknown .
Here we report that in erythroid cells , GATA-1 strongly induces the expression of the anti-apoptotic protein bel-x ; , but not the related proteins bel-2 and mel-1 .
Consistent with a role for in mediating GATA-1-induced erythroid cell survival , in vitro-differentiated ~- embryonic stem HE GENERATION of mature hematopoietic cells relies upon the establishment of lineage-specific developmental programs and the maintenance of precursor viability during cellular maturation .
Both of these requirements are achieved during erythroid development in embryos and adults by the essential X-linked transcription factor GATA-1 .
The first erythrocytes , termed primitive ( or embryonic ) , arise in the extraem-bryonic yolk sac .
Later , erythropoiesis occurs in the fetal liver where adult ( or definitive ) erythrocytes are produced .
Finally , at birth , erythrocyte production shifts to the bone marrow ( and spleen in mice ) .
Although primitive and definitive erythrocytes exhibit unique patterns of gene expression and growth factor requirements , `` `` GATA-1 is required for both lineages . ``
Gene knockout studies in mice have shown that in the absence of GATA-1 , committed erythroid precursors undergo maturation arrest and apoptosis . ``
' Moreover , inhibition of GATA-1 in erythroleukemia cells causes apoptosis . ``
In addition to its functions in erythroid development , GATA-1 is required for normal megakaryocytic differentiation . '
> '* GATA-1 recognizes conserved GATA-motifs found in the regulatory regions of virtually all erythroid-expressed genes including globins , heme biosynthetic enzymes , membrane pro-teins , and red blood cell transcription factors . ``
'' It is believed that GATA-1 helps to establish and maintain the erythroid phenotype by activating these genes .
How GATA-1 sustains erythroid precursor viability is unknown .
Erythropoietin ( Epo ) promotes erythroid development by maintaining the survival of committed precursors at the late colony-forming unit-erythroid ( CFU-E ) stage .
* `` Depriving primary definitive erythrocyte precursors and erythroid cell lines of Epo leads to apoptosis .
'* `` `` The gene encoding the Epo receptor ( EpoR ) contains functional GATA-binding sites in its promoter and enhancer , suggesting that it is a downstream target of GATA-1.2 However , GATA-1~ proerythroblasts express a normal level of EpoR mRNA .
! ``
Transcription of the EpoR gene and several other GATA target genes presumably occurs through the action of GATA-2 , a related transcription factor whose expression is elevated approximately 50-fold in the absence of GATA-1 .
The formation of GATA-1~ erythroid colonies is Epo-dependent , demonstrating that the EpoR signaling pathway is functionally intact in the mutant cells .
These observations exclude the simple model that apoptosis of GATA-1~ proerythroblasts is due to absence of the Epo receptor , and compelled us Blood , Vol 94 , No 1 ( July 1 ) , 1999 ; pp 87-96 cells fail to generate viable mature definitive erythroid cells , a phenotype resembling that of GATA-1 gene disruption .
In addition , we show that erythropoietin , which is also required for erythroid cell survival , cooperates with GATA-1 to stimulate bel-x , gene expression and to maintain erythroid cell viability during terminal maturation .
Together , our data show that bel-x , is essential for normal erythroid development and suggest a regulatory hierarchy in which bel-x , is a critical downstream effector of GATA-1 and erythropoietin-mediated signals .
© 1999 by The American Society of Hematology .
to search for additional GATA-1-induced survival pathways in erythroid cells .
The bel-2 gene family consists of various members with either pro- or anti-apoptotic activity . ``
'' One member , bel-x , ** appears to be especially important for erythropoiesis .
bel-x is upregulated during terminal erythroid maturation , `` and bel-x~'- embryos exhibit apoptosis of fetal liver hematopoietic cells and pallor . ``
However , the erythropoietic defect resulting from loss of bel-x function has not been well characterized .
bel-x has been implicated in mediating some effects of Epo signaling .
For example , forced bel-x expression inhibits apoptosis of Epo-deprived erythroid cells , and bel-x expression in erythroid cells is Epo-dependent .
`` `` > `` `` The latter observation positions bel-x downstream of the EpoR in a regulatory pathway that supports erythroid development by preventing apoptosis .
How EpoR signaling regulates bel-x and how GATA-1 fits into this scheme are not known .
GATA-1-regulated cellular maturation and viability occur through distinct pathways that have been uncoupled in the GATA-1~ erythroid cell line G1E . ``
'' G1E cells were derived from in vitro-differentiated GATA-1~ embryonic stem ( ES ) cells and represent primary GATA-1~ erythroblasts as deter From Ontogeny , Inc , Cambridge , MA ; the Division of Hematology-Oncology , Children 's Hospital , Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and the Department of Pediatrics , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA ; the Department of Medicine , Committee on Immunology , University of Chicago , Chicago , IL ; the Division of Hematology , Children 's Hospital of Philadelphia , University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine , Philadelphia , PA ; and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Boston , MA .
Submitted December 9 , 1998 ; accepted February 24 , 1999 .
The first two authors contributed equally to this work .
Supported in part by a grant from the National Institutes of Health ( KO8 HLO3364 , to M.J.W . )
Address reprint requests to Mitchell J. Weiss , MD , PhD , Ontogeny , Inc , 45 Moulton St , Cambridge MA 02138-1118 ; e-mail : mweiss @ ontogeny.com .
The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge payment .
This article must therefore be hereby marked `` adver-tisement `` in accordance with 18 U.S.C .
section 1734 solely to indicate this fact .
© 1999 by The American Society of Hematology .
0006-4971/99/9401-0038 $ 3.00/0 87 88 mined by the expression of erythroid , but not myeloid , genes . ``
A distinguishing property of G1E cells is that instead of undergoing apoptosis , they proliferate continuously in culture as developmentally arrested erythroid precursors .
This feature makes G1E cells ideally suited for genetic and cell biological studies .
Restoration of GATA-1 function in G1E cells triggers terminal erythroid maturation , providing a physiologically meaningful assay to determine structure-function relationships within GATA-1 , to evaluate protein interactions surrounding GATA-1 , and to identify novel genes activated or repressed by GATA-1 during terminal maturation .
`` * `` `` To facilitate these studies , we created a conditional ( estrogen-responsive ) form of GATA-1 by fusing its coding region to the ligand-binding domain of the human estrogen receptor ( ER ) .
G1E cells stably expressing the GATA-1/ER fusion protein ( termed G1E-ER cells ) undergo synchronous erythroid maturation after exposure to B-estradiol .
Here we show that bel-x ; , ( a splice variant which counteracts apoptotic signals ) mRNA and protein are strongly induced following GATA-1 activation in G1E-ER cells .
In vitro differentiation of bel-x~- ES cells shows maturation arrest and apoptosis of definitive erythroid precursors , similar to what we have observed upon loss of GATA-1 function .
Although GATA-1 and Epo stimulate bel-x expression independently in G1E-ER cells , their combined action is required for maximal bel-x induction and complete maturation .
Our data extend previous work which implicates a role for bel-x in erythroid development by identifying the stage of erythroid maturation at which bel-x becomes essential and by establishing a regulatory hierarchy in which GATA-1 and Epo cooperate to stimulate bel-x expression and prevent apoptosis of incipient erythrocytes .
MATERIALS AND METHODS Cytokines .
- All cytokines used were purchased from R & D Systems ( Minneapolis , MN ) , except for Epo ( Amgen , Thousand Oaks , CA ) .
Cell lines .
- G1E-ER cells are G1E cells that stably express murine GATA-1 fused to the ligand-binding domain of the human estrogen receptor . ``
For the experiments described here , we used the clone G1E-ER2 , which expresses a high level of GATA-1/estradiol receptor fusion protein and undergoes nearly complete estradiol-dependent differentiation ( > 80 % benzidine positive cells at 72 hours ) .
Unless otherwise specified , G1E-ER2 cells were grown in IMDM ( GIBCO-BRL , Grand Island , NY ) with 15 % heat-inactivated fetal calf serum ( Hyclone , Logan , UT ) , Epo 2 U/mL , and kit ligand ( KL , stem cell factor ) , 50 ng/mL .
For Epo-starvation experiments , cells were washed three times in phosphate-buffered saline , then resuspended in the same medium without Epo .
To induce activation of the conditional GATA-1 , cells were cultured in the presence of 10~ ' mol/L B-estradiol ( Sigma , St Louis , MO ) .
Benzidine staining was performed according to standard protocol .
`` ?
Cell viability was determined using the Live/Dead Viability/ Cytotoxicity Kit ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) .
bel-x *~ and bel-x~'~ gene-targeted ES cells were generated as described . ``
Cell-cycle analysis .
- Cells were fixed in 50 % ethanol and stained for DNA content with 7 X 10~5 mol/L propidium iodide .
Flow cytometry was performed using a FACScan flow cytometer ( Becton Dickinson , San Jose , CA ) .
Propidium iodide fluorescence was recorded using linear amplification and LYSYS II software , and analyzed using Cellfit software ( Becton Dickinson ) .
Data were acquired from intact single cells by using a doublet discriminator .
Ten thousand cells were analyzed from each sample .
GREGORY ET AL Plasmids and probes .
Probes for murine bel-x and bel-2 were supplied by Stanley Korsmeyer ( Dana Farber Cancer Institute , Boston , MA ) .
Probes for « - and B-globins , GATA-2 , c-myb , and B-actin were generated by reverse-transcribed polymerase chain reaction ( RT-PCR ) . ``
'' Plasmids encoding murine bel-x1 , and bel-xg for transcription-coupled translation were supplied by Harvey Cantor and Xiao-Feng Yang ( Dana-Farber Cancer Institute ) . ``
RT-PCR for bel-x mRNA splice variants .
Total RNA was isolated using Trizol reagent ( GIBCO-BRL ) .
Complementary DNA was synthesized using Superscript II reverse transcriptase ( GIBCO-BRL ) per the supplier 's instructions .
The following primers , indicated schematically in Fig 2B , were used for PCR : bel-x ; and bel-x , , LX8 ( 5'-CTCTCCTACAAGCTTTCCCAG-3 ' ) and LX10 ( 5'-CCAGCGGTT-GAAGCGCTCC-3 ' ) ; bel-xg B1 ( 5-AAATGTCTCAGAGCAACCG-3 ' ) and B3 ( 5-CACAGAGAAGAGAGACACAAGC-3 ' ) .
Plasmids containing the bel-x1 , coding region and mouse thymus cDNA were used as controls .
PCR was performed using Taq DNA polymerase ( Boehringer Mannheim , Indianapolis , IN ) for 30 cycles under the following conditions : 94°C , 30 seconds ; 50°C , 30 seconds ; and 72°C , 90 seconds .
PCR products were resolved by electrophoresis on 1.6 % agarose/Tris acetate gels .
Northern blotting .
- Total RNA was isolated using Trizol reagent and fractionated on 1.2 % agarose-formaldehyde gels according to standard conditions .
Northern blot analysis was performed using Hybond C+ ( Amersham , Arlington Heights , IL ) , according to the manufacturer 's instructions .
Blots were washed at a final stringency of 0.5X SSC at 65°C .
Western blotting .
Western blotting was performed according to standard protocols .
G1E-ER2 cells were lysed in 1X SDS sample buffer ( Sigma ) and passed through a 21-gauge needle several times to shear DNA .
Fifty micrograms of protein was fractionated on 14 % polyacryl-amide/sodium dodecyl sulfate ( SDS ) gel and electrophoretically transferred to nitrocellulose membrane .
Equal loading of proteins between samples was verified by Coomassie Blue staining of SDS-polyacryl-amide gels in parallel experiments .
Two polyclonal rabbit anti-human bel-x antibodies were used in independent experiments : no .
B22630 ( Transduction Laboratories , Lexington , KY ) , 1:1,000 dilution ; and bel-xggq , S-18 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Santa Cruz , CA ) at 1:100 dilution .
The secondary antibody was horseradish peroxidase-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit ( Amersham ) at 1:5,000 dilution .
Bound antibody was detected by chemiluminescence using the ECL Western blot kit ( Amersham ) .
In vitro transcription and translation of bel-x ; , and bel-xg was performed using the TNT coupled reticulocyte lysate system ( Promega , Madison , WD ) .
In vitro differentiation of ES cells .
Generation of hematopoietic colonies from ES cells was performed as described .
`` `` `` 5 The specific conditions used to assess various hematopoietic lineages are described in the text and figure legends .
Cytokine concentrations used for ES cell replating are as follows : Epo , 2 U/mL ; KL , 50 ng/mL ; granulocyte colony stimulating factor ( G-CSF ) , 1,000 U/mL ; granulocyte macro-phage colony-stimulating factor ( GM-CSF ) , 15 U/mL ; M-CSF , 100 U/mL .
In situ detection of apoptosis .
- Cells from erythroid colonies were deposited onto glass slides by cytocentrifugation .
The TUNEL ( terminal deoxynucleotidyItransferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling ) assay for apoptosis was performed using the ApopTag Apoptosis Detection Kit ( Oncor , Gaithersburg , MD ) according to the manufacturer 's instructions .
RESULTS GIE-ER2 cells undergo estradiol-dependent terminal erythroid maturation .
To achieve synchronous activation of GATA-1 in G1E cells , we generated a conditional form of murine GATA-1 in which its coding region was fused to that of the ligand-binding domain of the human ER .
`` °* `` This chimeric GATA-1 AND Epo REGULATE bel-x , IN ERYTHROID CELLS protein activates GATA-dependent promoter-reporter constructs in an estradiol-dependent fashion ( not shown ) .
After exposure to B-estradiol , G1E cells stably expressing the GATA-1/ER fusion product induced hemoglobin , as measured by benzidine staining .
The degree of benzidine staining varied among individual clones and correlated with the level of GATA-1/ER protein expressed ( not shown ) .
These observations are consistent with concentration-dependent requirements for GATA-1 observed during erythroid differentiation in vivo . ``
'' A clone expressing a relatively high level of the GATA-1/ER fusion protein , referred to as GIE-ER2 , exhibited nearly complete estradiol-dependent maturation ( benzidine staining observed in more than 80 % of cells after 72 hours ) ; this clone was used in the experiments described below .
Addition of estradiol to G1E-ER2 cultures triggered synchronous erythroid maturation ( Fig 1 , see page 91 ) .
Adult-type globin mRNAs were induced by 6 hours , and within 12 to 24 hours , cell division ceased with concomitant G1-phase cell-cycle arrest , followed by the appearance of benzidine-staining cells with a late normoblast morphology at 24 to 72 hours ( Fig 1A and B ) .
Concurrently , mRNA levels of c-myb and GATA-2 , markers for less differentiated states associated with higher proliferative capacity , `` `` `` `` decreased ( Fig 1C ) .
Estradiol had no apparent effect on the parental G1E line , which does not express the GATA-1/ER fusion protein .
Of note , the partial ER antagonist tamoxifen induced maturation of G1E-ER2 cells ( not shown ) .
Tamoxifen binds to the ER moiety of chimeric fusion proteins leading to activation , but in contrast to estradiol , fails to induce interaction of the ER ligand-binding domain with its cellular coactivators .
`` * `` `` This indicates that the biological effects of GATA-1/ER are attributable to the GATA-1 moiety of the fusion protein , which is consistent with our previous finding that wild-type GATA-1 introduced into G1E cells via retroviral transfer triggers terminal differentiation . ``
'' bel-x mRNA and bcl-x ; , protein are upregulated during GIE-ER2 cell maturation .
We examined expression patterns of various anti-apoptotic bel-2 gene family members during estradiol-induced G1E-ER2 cell maturation .
Among several candidates tested-including bel-2 , mel-1 , and bel-x-only bel-x was strongly upregulated upon GATA-1/ER activation ( Fig 2 and not shown ) .
After addition of estradiol , bel-x mRNA induction was detected at 24 hours and became more substantial by 48 hours ( Fig 2A ) .
In addition , bel-x mRNA was upregulated by tamoxifen in G1E-ER2 cells , but not by estradiol in parental G1E cells , excluding the possibility that bel-x is induced by estradiol in a GATA-1-independent manner ( see above ) .
Differential splicing of primary bel-x transcripts leads to the generation of proteins with varying effects on apoptosis.24494 !
RT-PCR analysis showed that bel-x1 , the anti-apoptotic form , and bel-xg , which can be either pro- or anti-apoptotic depending on cellular context , were induced during G1E-ER2 cell maturation ( Fig 2B ) .
mRNA encoding the short isoform , bel-x , , which antagonizes anti-apoptotic effects of bel-2 or bel-x1 , was undetectable .
A similar pattern of bel-x mRNA expression is observed in day 15.5 fetal liver , which consists primarily of erythroid cells.4 Western blots using two different polyclonal antibodies against bel-x detected the induction of a single protein of approximately 29 kD , paralleling the increase of bel-x mRNA 89 ( Fig 2C and not shown ) .
This bel-x protein migrated at a position identical to in vitro transcribed/translated and more slowly than bel-xg .
Therefore , bel-x ; , appears to be the predominant form expressed in G1ER-E2 cells .
These data show that bel-x1 , is a direct or indirect downstream target of GATA-1 , suggesting a mechanism by which GATA-1 maintains the viability of developing erythrocytes .
bol-x is essential at a late stage of definitive erythroid bel-x knockout mice die at embryonic day 13 with apoptosis of fetal liver hematopoietic cells and pallor . ``
To investigate whether failure to produce viable definitive erythroid cells is caused by a cell-autonomous defect of bel-x-null precursor cells , and to pinpoint the stage at which loss of bel-x function affects erythropoiesis , we analyzed the developmental potential of heterozygous mutant ( bel-x*'~ ) and homozygous null ( bel-x~ `` ~ ) ES cells using a two-step in vitro differentiation protocol . ``
'' Upon differentiation in vitro , ES cells form aggre-gates , termed embryoid bodies ( EBs ) , which contain numerous differentiated cell types , including hematopoietic precursors of multiple lineages , which appear in a well-defined temporal sequence .
Pure hematopoietic colonies are generated by disag-gregating EBs and replating the single-cell suspension into cytokine-containing methylcellulose cultures .
This technique allowed us to quantitate and evaluate primitive and definitive erythroid precursors from the bel-x gene-targeted ES cells .
To minimize the possibility that any differences between homozygous and heterozygous mutant cells are caused by a mutation unrelated to bel-x acquired during cell passage , all experiments were performed using two independently derived clones of bel-x~'~ ES cells ( nos .
48 and 99 ) .
The results obtained from these clones were indistinguishable ( not shown ) .
To generate primitive erythroid ( EryP ) colonies , 6-day-old EBs were replated into cultures with Epo .
Under these condi-tions , the majority of colonies formed were EryP as determined by histological staining of cytocentrifugation preparations ( not shown ) .
bel-x~'~- EryP progenitors formed in normal numbers ( Fig 3A ) , and generated normal-appearing , hemoglobinized colonies when compared with the heterozygous mutant cells ( Fig 3B ) .
There were no marked differences in size or extent of hemoglobinization between belx~~ , bel-x*'~ , and bel-x*'* EryP colonies ( Fig 3 and not shown ) .
These observations are consistent with the phenotype of bel-x~'~- embryos , in which primitive erythropoiesis is not drastically impaired . ``
Definitive erythroid ( EryD ) bel-x~~- colonies , which were generated from 10-day-old EBs replated into cultures with Epo and KL , were also normal in number .
However , in contrast to their EryP counterparts , bel-x~'~- EryD precursors were significantly impaired in their maturation as reflected by their failure to form fully hemoglobinized colonies ( Fig 4B ) , and by their abnormal cellular morphology ( Fig 4C ) .
In addition , the delay in maturation was accompanied by excessive apoptosis as shown by TUNEL staining of the bel-x~'~ erythroid cells ( Fig 4D ) .
These results are consistent with the observation that loss of bel-x function impairs viability of fetal liver erythrocytes in mice , `` `` and localize the defect to between the proerythroblast and early normoblast stage of development .
Therefore , bel-x is required for the survival and normal maturation of definitive erythroid cells .
The phenotype resulting from bel-x deficiency in maturation .
90 Cells » G1E G1E-ER2 - G1E-ER2 Drug » +E2 +E2 +Tamox .
Hours » Q 8 24 48 0 8 24 48 8 24 48 A GREGORY ET AL eath “ ﬂ bel-x Expected Size 602bp 413bp 620bp R2 ATG B jug io bcI-xL g. xo | > < .
ou pa Cn ( ___ | bets ; Cells » G1E-ER2 G1E-E Drug » +E2 +E2 Hours » C 24 - 48 T 24 48 _ “ Incl-xri 602bp 620bp ‘ bcI-xs LX8+LX10 413bp Fig 2 .
Induction of bel-x ; mRNA and protein by GATA-1 in G1E-ER2 cells .
G1E-ER2 and parental G1E cells were treated with estradiol ( E2 ) or tamoxifen Cells » G1 E_E R2 ( Tamox ) and sampled for bel-x mRNA and protein at Drug » +E2 ~ Y “ $ 3 “ !
the indicated times .
( A ) Northern blot analysis using CG Hours » 0 17 48 66 Q0 é : a cDNA probe .
Each lane contains 20 ug of total RNA .
( B ) Expression of splice variants bel-x ; , j -46kDa bel-x , , and bel-x , in maturing G1E-ER2 cells .
The top panel show s a schematic of the various bel-x mRNAs 1 examined and the primers used for detection by ® f 4 RT-PCR .
The bottom panels show the RT-PCR reac-bel XL “ ‘ - 1 ﬁ [ 30 tions for bel-x , and bel-x , ( left ) and bel-x , ( right ) .
The z. positive controls are bel-x ; cDNA plasmid ( C ) and 1 mouse thymus cDNA ( T ) .
( C ) bel-x protein expression : in G1E-ER2 cells .
For Western analysis ( left panel ) , 50 1 ~ § '-21 .5 wg of protein from whole-cell lysates was fraction-a % % ~ ated on a 14 % SDS polyacrylamide gel .
S methio-nine-labeled in vitro transcribed/translated ( TNT ) ﬁggtti ‘ n 355'T NT bel-x , and bel-x , isoforms were fractionated in adja-Products cent lanes ( right panel ! )
.
EryD cells is similar to that observed with GATA-1 loss , albeit less severe .
Nonerythroid colonies derived from in vitro differentiation of bel-x~'~ ES cells , including macrophage , granulocyte-macro-phage , and mast , were indistinguishable from wild-type and heterozygous mutant colonies in number and appearance ( not shown ) .
GATA-1 and Epo are both required for optimal bel-x expression .
- Because both GATA-1 and Epo are required for erythroid cell survival and optimal bel-x ( and this manuscript ) , we determined the effects of Epo deprivation on viability and bel-x expression in G1E-ER2 cells .
G1E-ER2 cells are typically grown in Epo and KL .
After Epo removal in the absence of estradiol , G1E-ER2 proliferation decreased slightly ( not shown ) , but more than 90 % of the cells remained viable ( -Epo , -E2 ; Fig 5A ) .
In contrast , Epo starvation during estradiol-induced maturation reduced viability by approximately 50 % at 48 hours ( -Epo , +E2 ; Fig 5A ) , although induction of globin RNAs ( Fig 5B ) and benzidine-positive cells still occurred ( not shown ) .
Therefore , Epo deficiency impairs survival of G1E-ER2 cells only during GATA-1-induced terminal maturation , but induction of terminal differentiation markers GATA-1 AND Epo REGULATE bel-x , IN ERYTHROID CELLS Fig 1 .
Activation of conditional GATA-1 in G1E-ER2 cells triggers terminal erythroid maturation .
Conditional GATA-1 was created by fusing the full-length murine cDNA to the ligand-binding domain of the human ER .
G1E-ER2 cells are a clone derived from stable expression of the GATA-1/ER chimeric protein in the GATA-1~ erythroid cell line , G1E .
( A ) Kinetics of G1 cell cycle arrest ( left ) and hemoglobin accumulation ( benzidine staining , right ) after addition of estradiol .
Note that estradiol has no cell-cycle-arresting or hemoglobin-inducing effects on the G1E parental line , which does not express estradiol-inducible GATA-1 .
( B ) G1E-ER2 cell morphology ( May-Grinwald-Giemsa staining , top panels ) and benzidine staining ( bottom panels ) before and 72 hours after addition of estradiol .
Original magnification : 1,000 % top panels ; 400 % , bottom panels .
( C ) Northern blot analysis of erythroid-expressed genes .
Each lane contains 15 pg of total RNA .
A May-Grunwald benzidine A w 1000 © o u ) C $ 100 c o 6 o o .
[ a 10 W B % G1 no estradiol 91 » ® 2 -o- - G1E 4 rd ( parental line ) | O .-r © / +- G1E-ERZ z S / N C ; c~-___ _ .
© / E= ] L !
it - # o + * Pi e r - 0 g -- A 10 0 200 % 4000 & o 20 a0 80 60 hours in estradiol # A O all t _ @ | ip bet-x* `` bel-x `` `` hours in estradiol estradiol 72hrs -globin { -globin € CATA-2 % I® ?
c-myb « 4th a. B-actin still occurs , consistent with models that assign a supportive , rather than instructive , role for Epo in erythroid differentia-tion.18424 Next , we tested whether Epo stimulates bel-x expression in G1E-ER2 cells ( Fig 5B ) .
In the absence of estradiol , removal of Epo reduced bel-x mRNA levels ( -Epo , -E2 ; Fig 5B ) with little or no effect on cell viability ( see above ) or -globin expression ; readdition of Epo restored bel-x mRNA level to baseline within 24 hours ( not shown ) .
During estradiol-induced maturation , Epo starvation markedly reduced but did not completely block the ability of GATA-1 to induce bel-x ( -Epo , +E2 ; Fig 5B ) .
Similar results were obtained when G1E-ER2 cells were cultured in serum-free defined medium ( not shown ) , excluding the possibility that trace amounts of Epo present in serum are required for induction of bel-x expression by GATA-1 .
Therefore , Epo and GATA-1 exert independent , Fig 3 .
Bcl-x is dispensable for normal development of primitive erythroid colonies .
( A ) Primitive erythroid ( EryP ) precursors were enumerated after secondary replating of 6-day-old embryoid bodies derived from in vitro differentiation of bel-x*'~ and bel-x~~ ES cells .
EryP colonies were generated in methylcellulose cultures containing Epo .
Similar results were obtained using two independently derived bel-x~'~ ES cell clones ( nos .
48 and 99 ) .
Bel-x~~ EryP colonies show n in B are from clone no .
48 .
Error bars represent standard error of the mean from three separate cultures .
( B ) bel-x*'~ and bel-x~- EryP colonies exhibit similar morphologies .
Five-day-old colonies are shown .
Original magnification x 400 .
92 100 EryD colonies/10 `` cells 3 1 ( # 19 ) polcx `` `` ( # 48 ) ( # 99 ) bei-x *~ bel-x */* bel-x */* bel-x `` ~ GREGORY ET AL Fig 4 .
Bcl-x -- definitive erythroid cells hemoglobinize poorly and undergo excessive apoptosis .
( A ) bel-x*'~ and bel-x~~ definitive erythroid ( EryD ) precursors were enumerated after replating 10-day-old embryoid bodies into cultures containing Epo and Kit ligand ( KL , stem cell factor ) .
Similar results were obtained using two independently derived bel-x~~ ES cell clones ( nos .
48 and 99 ) .
Analyses in B through D were performed using bel-x~~ EryD colonies from clone no .
48 .
Error bars represent standard error of the mean from three separate cultures .
( B ) bel-x-~~ EryD colonies are normal in size , but exhibit defective hemoglobinization .
Colonies show n are 6 days old .
Original magnification x 200 .
( C ) May-Griinwald-Giemsa staining of erythroid cells from 6-day-old bel-x*'~ and bel-x~~ EryD colonies .
Note the larger blast-like cells and cells with pyknotic nuclei within bel-x-~~ colonies .
Original magnification x 600 .
( D ) Excessive apoptosis within cells derived from bel-x~~ EryD colonies .
Upper triangles show DAPI staining ( blue ) , which displays the nuclei of all cells .
The same cells were stained for apoptosis using the TUNEL stain ( lower triangles , green } .
GATA-1 AND Epo REGULATE bel-x , IN ERYTHROID CELLS 93 -O -- +- -E2/-Epo -A -- E2/+Epo A 100 75 7 > # c ] S 50 a 25 Fig 5 .
Epo cooperates with GATA-1 to maximize bel-x induction and G1E-ER2 cell viability during terminal maturation .
( A ) Viability of G1E-ER2 cells Cells » cultured with various combinations of Epo and E2 .
Drug » Live and dead cells were quantitated using calcein AM and ethidium bromide , respectively .
Note that Epo is required for cell survival only during estradiol-induced terminal maturation .
( B ) Effects of Epo starvation on bel-x and B-globin mRNA expression in G1E-ER2 cells .
Cells were cultured with the indicated combinations of Epo and/ or estradiol ( E2 ) , sampled at various times and analyzed for gene expression by Northern blotting .
Note that Epo and GATA-1 can induce bel-x ; mRNA independently , although both are required for maximal expression .
Each lane contains 20 pg of total RNA .
cooperative effects on bel-x mRNA induction in erythroid cells .
In this cellular model for erythroid development , a strict requirement for Epo becomes manifest mainly during the later stages of maturation .
DISCUSSION For mature blood cells to form properly , it is essential that committed precursors are protected from cell death .
In most cell types , apoptosis is tightly regulated by interacting networks of cytokine signaling pathways , nuclear factors , and other effec-tors such as members of the caspase and bel-2 families .
Increased anti-apoptotic activity may be required in developing erythrocytes to counter stress caused by accumulation of intracellular iron and consequent production of toxic reactive oxygen species . ``
'' Here we establish a regulatory pathway in which EpoR and GATA-1 cooperate to induce bel-x ; , expres-sion , which in turn is critical for the survival of late proerythroblasts and early normoblasts ( Fig 6 ) .
Regulated expression of bel-2 gene family members is one mechanism by which apoptosis is controlled . ``
However , it remains possible that bel-x activity in erythroid cells might also be regulated through posttranslational mechanisms such as phosphorylation and availability of dimerization partners . ``
'' Knockout studies in mice can demonstrate the requirement of certain genes for the formation of a given cell type .
One limitation of such studies is that phenotypic analysis of 20 40 60 80 hours in estradiol _G1E-ER2_ _G1E-ER2_ +E2/+Epo +E2/-Epo -E2/-Epo Hours » Q 24 48 24 48 W. .
‘ wwe - < bcl-x 0 24 48 « a | « « 3-giobin homozygous gene-targeted animals can not distinguish between cell-autonomous versus indirect effects .
Here we have used in vitro differentiation of bel-x~~- ES cells to make this distinction .
Our observation that bel-x~'~ definitive erythroid CFU-E _ proerythroblast erythrocyte - @ - @ -- ll\ /EpoFl BcI-x GATA-apoptosis Fig 6 .
Anti-apoptosis pathways during terminal erythropoiesis .
GATA-1 and Epo receptor signaling both induce bel-x mRNA , and all three genes are required for survival of maturing definitive erythroid cells .
94 colonies fail to mature properly indicates that bel-x is required in a cell-autonomous fashion for normal erythroid development .
The similarity between the phenotypes observed in GATA-1~ and bel-x~'~ definitive erythroid cells is consistent with a model which places bel-x ; , downstream of GATA-1 in an erythroid cell survival pathway .
However , several notable differences exist between the two mutant phenotypes .
First , while GATA-1 is required for normal development of both primitive and definitive erythrocytes , bel-x appears to be essential predominantly for the definitive lineage , as evidenced by our results and the phenotype of homozygous null embryos . ``
'' It is possible that GATA-1 maintains viability of yolk sac erythrocytes by regulating the expression of other bel-2 family members , although none as yet have been shown to be limiting for primitive erythropoiesis .
Second , while GATA-1~ EryD colonies exhibit complete maturation arrest with failure to hemoglobinize , some age-matched bel-x~'~- colonies contain a higher proportion of viable cells and hemoglobinize partially .
Therefore , it is possible that GATA-1 activates other death-antagonizing genes ( or represses death-promoting ones ) in definitive erythrocytes , in addition to bel-x .
An open question remains as to whether bel-x is a direct transcriptional target of GATA-1 .
Two GATA consensus motifs reside in the 5 ' region of the human and mouse bel-x genes , upstream of a major transcription start site mapped by primer extension using several hematopoietic cell lines , `` `` including G1E-ER2 ( unpublished data , April 1998 ) .
DNA segments from this region activate transcription of reporter genes in several erythroid lines including MEL , G1E-ER2 ( unpublished data , April 1998 ) , and K562 , * `` with the majority of promoter activity residing in a 57-bp fragment that contains the proximal GATA motif . ``
Mutations in this motif which prevent GATA-1 binding have little effect on promoter activity in MEL , K562 , or G1E cells ( unpublished data , August 1998 ) .
It is possible that GATA-1 regulates expression through other elements present elsewhere in the gene .
Alternatively , bel-x might be an indirect target of GATA-1 .
This latter possibility is supported by the delayed kinetics of bel-x ; , induction after GATA-1 activation ( Fig 2A , above ) .
Loss of Epo signaling through gene targeting results in apoptosis of committed definitive erythroid precursors at the late CFU-E stage , * `` and Epo is required for optimal expression of bel-x in erythroid cells . ``
Therefore , it is possible that Epo exerts some of its anti-apoptotic effects by inducing bel-x expression .
Epo and several other hematopoietic cytokines are believed to induce bel-x through a JAK-dependent pathway .
`` ?
In addition , Epo may upregulate bel-x by inhibiting the expression of JunB , a member of the AP-1 transcription factor family . ``
'' While GATA-1 can induce bel-x ; , expression independent of Epo , we do not exclude the possibility that crosstalk also exists .
For example , GATA-1 might regulate the expression of genes that modulate EpoR signaling .
However , in GIE-ER2 cells , it is unlikely that GATA-1 influences bel-x ; , expression by directly stimulating transcription of the EpoR gene , as EpoR mRNA level decreases slightly during the period of maximal bel-x induction ( unpublished data , October 1998 ) , and the half-life of EpoR protein in hematopoietic cells is only about 60 minutes . ``
'' Epo requirements vary in G1E cells according to their state of GREGORY ET AL maturation , which in turn is controlled by GATA-1 .
In the absence of GATA-1 activity , the cells exhibit an immature erythroid phenotype , are relatively Epo insensitive , but require KL for proliferation and survival .
Based on these cytokine requirements , * G1E cells most closely approximate the late BFU-E or early CFU-E stage of erythroid development .
Because primary GATA-1~ erythroid progenitors die at the proerythroblast stage , it appears that G1E cells were immortalized at a level of differentiation upstream of where the antiapoptotic effect of GATA-1 is exercised . '
'' > `` ' Estradiol-induced GATA-1 activation in G1E-ER2 cells triggers terminal maturation accompanied by transition into a state of Epo-dependency , consistent with the in vivo requirement for Epo during the late CFU-E and proerythroblast stages .
** `` `` GATA-1 activation without Epo causes cellular maturation , but bel-x ; , induction is reduced and the cells die .
We speculate that Epo is required along with GATA-1 to achieve a critical level of bel-x ; , that is required for terminal differentiation .
The apparently normal erythroid phenotype in bel-x heterozygous mutant states implies that either 50 % bel-x protein is sufficient , or that there is a compensatory increase in expression of the intact allele .
In contrast to Epo , KL is not required for viability or bel-x1 , mRNA induction during GATA-1-stimulated maturation of G1E-ER2 cells ( unpublished data , January 1999 ) .
The shift from KL to Epo-dependency during terminal differentiation of GE cells resembles the pattern of cytokine response exhibited during normal definitive erythropoeisis .
* Hematopoietic cytokines , including Epo , are believed to function as survival factors that are supportive for terminal differentiation .
Accordingly , forced expression of bel-2 partially rescues the hematopoietic phenotypes of interleukin-7 ( IL-7 ) receptor- and M-CSF receptor-deficient mice . ``
The EpoR probably has a similar , supportive role , * `` yet overexpression of bel-2 does not rescue Epo-deprived erythroid precursors from death . ``
'' This may reflect a critical function for bel-x in erythroid cells that can not be substituted for by related proteins .
In contrast to the role for Epo signaling in terminal erythropoiesis , GATA-1 exerts more pleiotropic actions , fostering cell survival and erythroid maturation .
Therefore , while forced expression of bel-x might rescue apoptosis of GATA-1~ erythroid precursors in vivo , it would not be expected to overcome the maturation arrest associated with the mutant phenotype .
Induction of bel-x ; , by GATA-1 shows a connection between an essential anti-apoptosis pathway and a tissue-specific transcription factor required for erythroid differentiation .
Gene targeting and overexpression studies have identified numerous nuclear factors that participate in the determination and differentiation of specific hematopoietic lineages . ``
Enhancement of cell survival through regulation of viability genes may be a common mechanism through which transcription factors participate in the developmental control of hematopoiesis .
ACKNOWLEDGMENT We thank Craig Thompson , Tullia Lindsten , Haidi Yang , and Kay MacLeod for providing bel-x genomic DNA ; Stanley Korsmeyer , Harvey Cantor , and Xiao-Feng Yang for providing plasmid DNAs ; and Christopher Guo for performing site-directed mutagenesis on bel-x promoter sequences .
We thank Merav Socolovsky and Gordon Keller for reviewing this manuscript prior to publication .
GATA-1 AND Epo REGULATE bel-x , IN ERYTHROID CELLS REFERENCES 1 .
Wood WG : Erythropoiesis and haemoglobin production during development , in Jones CT ( ed ) : Biochemical development of the fetus and neonate .
New York , NY , Elsevier Biomedical , 1982 , p 127 2 .
Mucenski ML , McLain K , Kier AB , Swerdlow CM , Schreiner TA , Miller TA , Pictryga DW , Scott WJJ , Potter SS : A functional c-myb gene is required for normal fetal hematopoiesis .
Cell 65:677 , 1991 3 .
Ogawa M , Nishikawa S , Yoshinaga K , Hayashi S , Kunisada T , Nakao J , Kina T , Sudo T , Kodama H , Nishikawa S : Expression and function of c-Kit in fetal hemopoietic progenitor cells : transition from the early c-Kit-independent to the late c-Kit-dependent wave of hemopoiesis in the murine embryo .
Development 117:1089 , 1993 4 .
Wu H , Liu X , Jaenisch R , Lodish HF : Generation of committed erythroid BFU-E and CFU-E progenitors does not require erythropoietin or the erythropoietin receptor .
Cell 83:59 , 1995 5 .
Chyuan-Sheng L , Lim S-K , D ' Agati V , Costantini F : Differential effects of an erythropoietin receptor gene disruption on primitive and definitive erythropoiesis .
Genes Dev 10:154 , 1996 6 .
Wang Q , Stacy T , Binder M , Marin-Padilla M , Sharpe AH , Speck NA : Disruption of the Cbfa2 gene causes necrosis and hemorrhaging in the central nervous system and blocks definitive hematopoiesis .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:3444 , 1996 7 .
Okuda T , van Deursen J , Hiebert SW , Grosveld G , Downing JR : AML1 , the target of multiple chromosomal translocations in human leukemia , is essential for normal fetal liver hematopoiesis .
Cell 84:321 , 1996 8 .
Pevny L , Simon MC , Robertson E , Klein WH , Tsai S-F , D ' Agati V , Orkin SH , Costantini F : Erythroid differentiation in chimaeric mice blocked by a targeted mutation in the gene for transcription factor GATA-1 .
Nature 349:257 , 1991 9 .
Fujiwara Y , Browne CP , Cunniff K , Goff SC , Orkin SH : Arrested development of embryonic red cell precursors in mouse embryos lacking transcription factor GATA-1 .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93 : 12355 , 1996 10 .
Weiss MJ , Keller G , Orkin SH : Novel insights into erythroid development revealed through in vitro differentiation of GATA-1~ embryonic stem cells .
Genes Dev 8:1184 , 1994 11 .
Weiss MJ , Orkin SH : Transcription factor GATA-1 permits survival and maturation of erythroid precursors by preventing apoptosis .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92:9623 , 1995 12 .
Blobel GA , Orkin SH : Estrogen-induced apoptosis by inhibition of the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 .
Mol Cell Biol 16:1687 , 1996 13 .
Pevay L , Chyuan-Sheng L , D'Agati V , Simon MC , Orkin SH , Costantini F : Development of hematopoietic cells lacking transcription factor GATA-1 .
Development 121:163 , 1994 14 .
Shivdasani RA , Fujiwara Y , McDevitt MA , Orkin SH : A lineage-selective knockout establishes the critical role of transcription factor GATA-1 in megakaryocyte growth and platelet development .
EMBO J 16:3965 , 1997 15 .
Orkin SH : GATA-binding transcription factors in hematopoietic cells .
Blood 80:575 , 1992 16 .
Webster NJG , Green S , Rui Jin J , Chambon P : The hormone-binding domains of the estrogen and glucocorticoid receptors contain an inducible transactivation function .
Cell 54:199 , 1988 17 .
Weiss MJ , Orkin SH : GATA transcription factors : Key regulators of hematopoiesis .
Exp Hematol 23:99 , 1995 18 .
Kelley LL , Koury MJ , Bondurant MC , Koury ST , Sawyer ST , Wickrema A : Survival or death of individual proerythroblasts results from differing erythropoietin sensitivities : A mechanism for controlled rates of erythrocyte production .
Blood 82:2340 , 1993 19 .
Koury MJ , Bondurant MC : Erythropoietin retards DNA breakdown and prevents programmed cell death in erythroid cells .
Science 248:378 , 1990 95 20 .
Silva M , Grillot D , Benito A , Richard C , Nunez G , Fernandez-Luna JL : Erythropoietin can promote erythroid progenitor survival by repressing apoptosis through Bcl-XL and Bel-2 .
Blood 88:1576 , 1996 21 .
Zon LI , Youssoufian H , Mather C , Lodish HF , Orkin SH : Activation of the erythropoietin receptor promoter by transcription factor GATA-1 .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:10638 , 1991 22 .
Heberlein C , Fischer KD , Stoffel M , Nowock J , Ford A , Tessmer U , Stocking C : The gene for erythropoietin receptor is expressed in multipotential hematopoietic and embryonal stem cells : evidence for differentiation stage-specific regulation .
Mol Cell Biol 12:1815 , 1992 23 .
Yang E , Korsmeyer SJ ; Molecular thanatopsis : A discourse on the BCL2 family and cell death .
Blood 88:386 , 1996 24 .
Boise LH , Gonzalez-Garcia M , Postema CB , Ding L , Lindsten T , Turka LA , Mao X , Nunez G , Thompson CB : bel-x , a bel-2-related gene that functions as a dominant regulator of apoptotic cell death .
Cell 741597 , 1993 25 .
Gregoli PA , Bondurant MC : The roles of Bel-X ( L ) and apopain in the control of erythropoiesis by erythropoietin .
Blood 90:630 , 1997 26 .
Motoyama N , Wang F , Roth KA , Sawa H , Nakayama K , Nakayama K , Negishi I , Senju S , Zhang Q , Satoshi F , Loh DY : Massive cell death of immature hematopoietic cells and neurons in Bcl-X-deficient mice .
Science 267:1506 , 1995 27 .
Benito A , Silva M , Grillot D , Nunez G , Fernandez-Luna JL : Apoptosis induced by erythroid differentiation of human leukemia cell lines is inhibited by Bel-XL .
Blood 87:3837 , 1996 28 .
Weiss MJ , Yu C , Orkin SH : Erythroid-cell-specific properties of transcription factor GATA-1 revealed by phenotypic rescue of a gene-targeted cell line .
Mol Cell Biol 17:1642 , 1997 29 .
Tsang AP , Visvader JE , Turner CA , Fujiwara Y , Yu C , Weiss MJ , Crossley M , Orkin SH : FOG , a multitype zinc finger protein , acts as a cofactor for transcription factor GATA-1 in erythroid and megakaryocytic differentiation .
Cell 90:109 , 1997 30 .
Kumar V , Hreen S , Staub A , Chambon P : Localisation of the oestradiol-binding and putative DNA-binding domains of the human oestrogen receptor .
EMBO J 5:2231 , 1986 31 .
Briegel K , Lim K-C , Plank C , Beug H , Engel JD , Zenke M : Ectopic expression of a conditional GATA-2/estrogen receptor chimera arrests erythroid differentiation in a hormone-dependent manner .
Genes Dev 7:1097 , 1993 32 .
Orkin SH , Harosi FI , Leder P : Differentiation in erythroleukemic cells and their somatic hybrids .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 72:98 , 1975 33 .
Ma A , Pena JC , Chang B , Margosian E , Davidson L , Alt FW , Thompson CB : Bcl-x regulates the survival double-positive thymo-cytes .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92:4763 , 1995 34 .
Yang XF , Weber GF , Cantor H : A novel Bcl-x isoform connected to the T cell receptor regulates apoptosis in T cells .
Immunity 7:629 , 1997 35 .
Keller G , Kennedy M , Papayannopoulou T , Wiles MV : Hematopoietic differentiation during embryonic stem cell differentiation in culture .
Mol Cell Biol 13:472 , 1993 36 .
McDevitt MA , Shivdasani RA , Fujiwara Y , Yang H , Orkin SH : A `` knockdown `` mutation created by cis-element gene targeting reveals the dependence of erythroid cell maturation on the level of transcription factor GATA-1 .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:6781 , 1997 37 .
McClinton D , Stafford J , Brents L , Bender TP , Kuehl WM : Differentiation of mouse erythroleukemia cells is blocked by late up-regulation of a c-myb transgene .
Mol Cell Biol 10:705 , 1990 38 .
Halachmi S , Marden E , Martin G , MacKay H , Abbondanza C , Brown M : Estrogen receptor-associated proteins : possible mediators of hormone-induced transcription .
Science 264:1455 , 1994 39 .
Hanstein B , Eckner R , DiRenzo J , Halachmi S , Liu H , Searcy B , Kurokawa R , Brown M : p300 is a component of an estrogen receptor coactivator complex .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:11540 , 1996 40 .
Fang W , Rivard JJ , Mueller DL , Behrens TW : Cloning and 96 molecular characterization of mouse bel-x in B and T lymphocytes .
J Immunol 153:4388 , 1994 41 .
Gonzalez-Garcia M , Perez-Ballestero R , Ding L , Duan L , Boise LH , Thompson CB , Nunez G : bel-X ; , is the major bel-x mRNA form expressed during murine development and its product localizes to mitochondria .
Development 120:3033 , 1994 42 .
Socolovsky M , Lodish HF , Daley GQ : Control of hematopoietic differentiation : Lack of specificity in signaling by cytokine receptors .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:6573 , 1998 43 .
Lacombe C , Mayeux P : Biology of erythropoietin .
Haemato-logica 83:724 , 1998 44 .
Comelli M , Londero D , Mavelli I : Severe energy impairment consequent to inactivation of mitochondrial ATP synthase as an early event in cell death : A mechanism for the selective sensitivity to H202 of differentiating erythroleukemia cells .
Free Radic Biol Med 24:924 , 1998 45 .
White E : Life , death , and the pursuit of apoptosis .
Genes Dev 10:1 , 1996 46 .
Adams JM , Cory S : The Bcel-2 protein family : Arbiters of cell survival .
Science 281:1322 , 1998 47 .
Grillot DA , Gonzalez-Garcia M , Ekhterae D , Duan L , Inchara N , Ohta S , Seldin MF , Nunez G : Genomic organization , promoter region analysis , and chromosome localization of the mouse bel-x gene .
J Immunol 158:4750 , 1997 48 .
Zhuang H , Niu Z , He TC , Patel SV , Wojchowski DM : Erythropoi-etin-dependent inhibition of apoptosis is supported by carboxyl-truncated receptor forms and blocked by dominant-negative forms of Jak2 .
J Biol Chem 270:14500 , 1995 49 .
Packham G , White EL , Eischen CM , Yang H , Parganas E , Thle GREGORY ET AL JN , Grillot DA , Zambetti GP , Nunez G , Cleveland JL : Selective regulation of Bcl-XL by a JAK kinase-dependent pathway is bypassed in murine hematopoietic malignancies .
Genes Dev 12:2475 , 1998 50 .
Jacobs-Helber SM , Penta K , Sun Z , Lawson A , Sawyer ST : Distinct signaling from stem cell factor and erythropoietin in HCDS7 cells .
J Biol Chem 272:6850 , 1997 51 .
Yoshimura A , D'Andrea AD , Lodish HF : Friend spleen focus-forming virus glycoprotein gpS55 interacts with the erythropoietin receptor in the endoplasmic reticulum and affects receptor metabolism .
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87:4139 , 1990 52 .
Neumann D , Wikstrom L , Watowich SS , Lodish HF : Intermediates in degradation of the erythropoietin receptor accumulate and are degraded in lysosomes .
J Biol Chem 268:13639 , 1993 53 .
Maraskovsky E , O'Reilly LA , Teepe M , Corcoran LM , Peschon JJ , Strasser A : Bcel-2 can rescue T lymphocyte development in interleukin-7 receptor-deficient mice but not in mutant RAG-1-/-mice .
Cell 89:1011 , 1997 54 .
Lagasse E , Weissman IL : Enforced expression of Bel-2 in monocytes rescues macrophages and partially reverses osteopetrosis in op/op mice .
Cell 89:1021 , 1997 55 .
Akashi K , Kondo M , von Freeden-Jeffry U , Murray R , Weissman IL : Bcl-2 rescues T lymphopoiesis in interleukin-7 receptor-deficient mice .
Cell 89:1033 , 1997 56 .
Lacronique V , Varlet P , Mayeux P , Porteu A , Gisselbrecht S , Kahn A , Lacombe C : Bcl-2 targeted overexpression into the erythroid lineage of transgenic mice delays but does not prevent the apoptosis of erythropoietin-deprived erythroid progenitors .
Blood 90:3050 , 1997 57 .
Orkin SH : Hematopoiesis : How does it happen ?
Curr Opin Cell Biol 7:870 , 1995
